Google
WAY
T h e
How One Company Is Revolutionizing
Management As We Know It
Bernard Girard
Shortly after World War I, Ford and GM
created the large modern corporation, with
its financial and statistical controls, mass
production, and assembly lines. In the 1980s,
Toyota stood out for combining quality with
continuous refinement. Today, Google is
reinventing business yet again — the way we
work, how organizations are controlled, and
how employees are managed.
Management consultant Bernard Girard has
been analyzing Google since its founding in
1998, and now in The Google Way, he explores
Google’s innovations in depth — many of
which are far removed from the best practices
taught at the top business schools.
As you read, you’ll see how much of Google’s
success is due to its focus on users and
automation. You’ll also learn how eCommerce
has profoundly changed the relationship
between businesses and their customers, for
the first time giving customers an important
role to play in a major corporation’s growth.
Finally, Girard speculates about the limits of
Google’s business model and discusses the
challenges it will face as it continues to grow.
Google’s culture is one of innovation. Why not
make that spirit of innovation your own?
$24.95 ($24.95 CDN)

The Google Way

The
Google
Way
How One Company Is
Revolutionizing Management
As We Know It
by
Bernard Girard
The Google Way. Copyright © 2009 by Bernard Girard.
The Google Way is a translation and revision of the French original, Le Modèle Google, Une Révolution
du Management, isbn 2-916260-11-0, published by M21 Editions of Paris, France. © 2008 by M21
Editions.
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage
or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the copyright owner and the publisher.
13 12 11 10 09 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
isbn-10: 1-59327-184-0
isbn-13: 978-1-59327-184-8
Publisher: William Pollock
Translator: Eldon Brown
Production Editor: Megan Dunchak
Cover Design: Octopod Studios
Developmental Editor: William Pollock
Copyeditor: LeeAnn Pickrell
Compositor: Riley Hoffman
Proofreader: Gabriella West
Indexer: Karin Arrigoni
For information on book distributors or translations, please contact No Starch Press, Inc. directly:
No Starch Press, Inc.
555 De Haro Street, Suite 250, San Francisco, CA 94107
phone: 415.863.9900; fax: 415.863.9950; info@nostarch.com; www.nostarch.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Girard, Bernard.
[Le modèle Google, une révolution du management. English]
The Google way : how one company is revolutionizing management as we know it / Bernard Girard.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-59327-184-8
ISBN-10: 1-59327-184-0
1. Google (Firm)--Management. 2. Internet industry--United States--Management. 3. Web search
engines--United States--Management. I. Title.
HD9696.8.U64G66513 2009
658.4'012--dc22
2008054604
No Starch Press and the No Starch Press logo are registered trademarks of No Starch Press, Inc. Other
product and company names mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their respective owners.
Rather than use a trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, we are using the
names only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of
infringement of the trademark.
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every precaution
has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the author nor No Starch Press, Inc. shall
have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be
caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in it.
Contents
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Introduction: A Management Breakthrough . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
I
An Unorthodox Corporate Saga
Chapter 1: Rebels with a Cause . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Chapter 2: The Google Economic Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
II
A Formula 1 Engine
Chapter 3: Three Iconoclasts at the Top . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Chapter 4: Recruiting the Best . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Chapter 5: The 20 Percent Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Chapter 6: Coworkers Are the Best Judges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Chapter 7: An Innovation Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Chapter 8: Like a Swiss Army Knife . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Chapter 9: For the Love of Math and Measurement . . . . . . . . . 97
Chapter 10: Keep the Teams Small . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Chapter 11: Coordination Through Technology . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Chapter 12: The Secret Is in the Factory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
vi Contents
III
Put Users First; the Rest Will Follow
Chapter 13: Automating Sales and User Relationships . . . . . . 135
Chapter 14: Putting Users in Charge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
IV
Challenges and Risks
Chapter 15: Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
Chapter 16: Can Google Evade Conformity? . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
Chapter 17: A Look Ahead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
Afterword: A Model for All Managers? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 229
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239
Acknowledgments
First, I would like to thank all those who contributed to this book’s
ideas and preparation. The sources that underlie it are numerous and
include conversations with current and former Googlers, bloggers,
technologists, economists, and many others whose articles and papers
were of great help. But I would especially like to thank all those with
whom I had, in both Europe and America, the rare opportunity to
discuss Google’s management and methods.
Of those who helped me directly, thanks to Malo Girod de l’Ain,
my French publisher, who offered me some very good advice while
I was drafting this book and gave me the opportunity to test out
many of my ideas on the blog he launched as soon as he decided
to publish this book. Eldon Brown did a beautiful job translating
the French original into English. And Bill Pollock, my American
editor—I never thought someone could read a manuscript so carefully
and with so deep a knowledge of the topic. He made invaluable
suggestions. Working with him was a pleasure.
viii Acknowledgments
Finally, I would like to thank those who built Google, the
wonderful search engine that gives everyone access to all the world’s
knowledge.
Bernard Girard
Paris, France
March 2009
Introduction:
A Management Breakthrough
Beginning shortly after World War I, Ford and
General Motors created the large modern corporation,
with its financial and statistical controls, mass
production, standardization, scientifically organized
assembly lines, and autonomous divisions. By the
1960s, mass distribution had created the consumer
society, with its system of credit sales, self-service
stores, media networks, mass media ad campaigns,
brands, and international products.
In the 1980s, the Toyota Motor Corporation was
the archetype of an industrial company focused on
product quality combined with a corporate culture
2 Introduction
of continuous refinement. Today, Google is the company that is
reinventing management methods: the way people work, how organizations
are controlled, and how people are managed.
Google operates within the specialized context of the Internet
economy of distributed intelligence, born in the early 1990s in
Silicon Valley, California. Although the Silicon Valley environment
imbues Google with an aura of carefree dynamism unlike companies
such as General Motors, Ford, and Toyota, the massages, swimming
pools, volleyball courts, and free lunches don’t make Larry Page and
Sergey Brin, Google’s co-founders, any less formidable than Henry
Ford or Taiichi Ohno, the creator of Toyota’s lean production system.
Google can be seen as a new enterprise archetype because its
management has made several innovations in human resources,
production, customer relations, and most of all, control of its production
operations. Google’s ways are the result of its own initiatives,
but Google also borrows from other technology companies,
and the company collaborates (whether directly or indirectly) with
the co‑founders’ alma mater, Stanford University. Where possible,
I discuss these affiliations, but the most important thing to note is
that Google first implemented these methods systematically. The
company’s rapid growth, the co-founders’ personalities, their vision,
their scientific culture, their obsessions, and the expertise surrounding
them have all contributed to the construction of this unique
business model that is the Google way.
My goal with this book is to provide you with the keys to understanding
how and why the Google way has been successful. Although
the book focuses on Google, I will also touch on companies like
Amazon.com that have adopted this progressive management style.
Following an overview of Google’s early days, Part I analyzes the
economic model built by Google’s leaders.
Part II, the largest section of the book, discusses in detail the
management methods adopted by the Google co-founders—methods
that are far removed from the best practices taught at the top business
schools. Each area of innovation—whether in human resources,
organization, development, or production—is compared to the norm
and the differences discussed.
A Management Breakthrough 3
Part III continues with an analysis of the business environment
that surrounded Google’s development. Google’s success in attracting
users and in besting the competition has been largely due to its
focus and understanding of its user communities. You will see how
the automation of commerce, eCommerce, has profoundly changed
business relationships with users by, for the first time, giving them
an important role to play in a major corporation’s growth. Google’s
obsession with putting users first has greatly contributed to the
company’s growth and success, and its breakthroughs in management
are also breakthroughs in customer relations.
In Part IV, I speculate about the limits of the Google way and
discuss the challenges that Google will face as it continues to grow.
Finally, in the book’s last chapter, I attempt to analyze the impact
of the current global recession on Google’s model.
Google’s management innovations are made all the more interesting
because the company is the first to have built a management
model for the knowledge economy. I hope that in reading this book
you will gain a better understanding of the new paradigm that is the
Google way, and that, as you begin to understand it, you will find
ways to adapt the Google way to your own professional environment.

Part I
An Unorthodox Corporate Saga

Google’s story has been retold many
times: the saga of Larry Page and Sergey
Brin, two students who began their
collaboration at Stanford University
in the spring of 1995 with a project to
improve search engine results. Today,
little more than a decade later, they
head one of the most successful enterprises
in history.
In many respects, their story resembles
that of all entrepreneurs—Steve Jobs
8 An Unorthodox Corporate Saga
or Bill Gates in consumer computing, even Henry Ford or Alfred P.
Sloan in automobiles. But more so than most of their predecessors,
Page and Brin’s chosen marketplace and the context of their venture
are central elements of the Google story.
1
Rebels with a Cause
Google co-founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin
have undeniable talent. Who else in recent memory
has been able to start and build a world-changing,
international powerhouse seemingly overnight?
Page and Brin have the self-confidence and conviction
of visionaries for whom making a fortune
is not enough. They want to change the world,
and they are driven by a shared desire to improve
Internet searching.
10 Chapter 1
Nonconformists, they make decisions that buck conventional
wisdom with ease. Anyone tracking the Google IPO learned this
early when Google adopted a Dutch auction format that gave the
investment world quite a stir in its attempt to democratize the sale
of shares.
And Page and Brin are true friends, a characteristic shared by
several company co-founders before them, like college buddies
Bill Gates and Paul Allen, the two Microsoft co-founders, and college
friends Dan Bricklin and Bob Frankston of VisiCalc (the first
spreadsheet). Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs met as 18-year-olds at
a summer IT class hosted by Hewlett-Packard. Hewlett-Packard, in
turn, was founded by college friends Bill Hewlett and Dave Packard.
And the list goes on.
Friendship creates a safe space for people to exchange and test
their ideas, and friends can drive each other to succeed. In an environment
as risky and turbulent as Silicon Valley, friendships can
foster an us-against-them mentality that helps companies resist the
pressures that threaten their independence.
Finally, but no less important, Page and Brin figured out how to
take advantage of every available resource. In his pivotal book Art
Worlds, the sociologist Howard S. Becker demonstrates that artists—
the most individualistic of individualists—need what he terms “art
worlds” to create their work. Entrepreneurs are no different. The
co‑founders of Google benefited from both a favorable environment
and fortunate circumstances. The university they both attended,
Stanford, competes with the University of California, Berkeley, to
train some of the most highly skilled developers of web technology.
(Two earlier large search engines, Yahoo! and Excite, also got their
start at Stanford.)
Page and Brin founded Google when startup funding was available
within their financial environment, and the legal environment
facilitated the mobility of expertise and free circulation of ideas.
Maturing hardware technologies meant that the memory and microprocessors
they needed to build their engine were getting cheaper
all the time, thanks to manufacturing in southeast Asia.
Rebels with a Cause 11
Direct Heirs of Artificial Intelligence
As Stanford students, Larry Page and Sergey Brin inherited a long,
rich technological tradition. Using the term tradition in conjunction
with a company that developed a brand-new technology might
seem strange, but their breakthrough was a direct outgrowth of the
concept of artificial intelligence (AI), which had been in development
at some universities for half a century. When Page and Brin
explain Google’s mission, “to organize the world’s information and
make it universally accessible and useful,” they are simply repeating
the memex agenda—a theoretical project envisioned by Vannevar
Bush, one of the more important American scientists during the
presidencies of Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman.
Seeing the debt Google owes Bush is easy when you read an
article he wrote in 1945, against the backdrop of World War II,
when he was a scientific advisor to the White House:
There is a growing mountain of research. But there is
increased evidence that we are being bogged down today
as specialization extends. The investigator is staggered by the
findings and conclusions of thousands of other workers—
conclusions which he cannot find time to grasp, much less
to remember, as they appear. Yet specialization becomes
increasingly necessary for progress, and the effort to bridge
between disciplines is correspondingly superficial. Professionally
our methods of transmitting and reviewing the
results of research are generations old and by now are totally
inadequate for their purpose. . . . The summation of human
experience is being expanded at a prodigious rate, and the
means we use for threading through the consequent maze
to the momentarily important item is the same as was used
in the days of square-rigged ships. . . . A record if it is to be
useful to science, must be continuously extended, it must
be stored, and above all it must be consulted.1
Bush went on to list some contemporary techniques likely to
address this problem before describing an imaginary machine called
a memex. It sounded like science fiction at the time, but this machine
12 Chapter 1
nourished the dreams of technology experts and artificial intelligence
advocates for decades until it became a reality:
Consider a future device for individual use, which is a sort
of mechanized private file and library. It needs a name, and,
to coin one at random, “Memex” will do. A Memex is a
device in which an individual stores all his books, records,
and communications, and which is mechanized so that it
may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility. It is
an enlarged intimate supplement to his memory.2
These early stages of modern Information Science were one source
of Page and Brin’s ambition and vision to make all the information
in the world accessible. The Google co-founders were also given
access to a considerable body of research. Universities played an
important part in developing technology hubs, not only by training
professionals who would go to work for the surrounding companies
but also by making the work of their researchers freely accessible.
This tradition helped form Page and Brin’s values and convictions.
In particular, they had confidence in the capabilities of computers
and the automation initiatives at the core of their corporate model.
The Invention of Page Ranking
As their thesis topic at Stanford University, Page and Brin chose the
classification of search engine results from the Web. The subject may
sound abstract or esoteric to some, but everyone involved in search
at the time was focused on it.
Searching for information on electronic media is a field that
goes back a long way, perhaps to July 1945 and the publication of
Vannevar Bush’s “As We May Think” in The Atlantic Monthly.
Gerard Salton is thought to be the father of modern search,
having developed the System for the Mechanical Analysis and
Retrieval of Text (SMART) Information Retrieval System at Cornell
University in the 1960s. Since then, software engineers have worked
with librarians and documentation specialists to develop software
to quickly find scientific information stored in databases containing
Rebels with a Cause 13
tens of thousands of book and articles. These efforts have followed
two parallel tracks:
• Some automated the work of librarians, who index documents
within a subject area, describe those documents with keywords,
and then compile those keywords in a database called a thesaurus
(not to be confused with the reference book of synonyms and
antonyms). Employing these programs, the user (usually an
expert) can perform complex research using Boolean operators
(and, or, not, and so on).
• Others wanted to automate the process fully by having the
computer compare the words of the request with those in the
documents. In these programs, like LexisNexis from Mead
Corporation,* the computer shows the user all the documents
where the requested keywords appear, and the user can weight
them by relevance. To prevent too many junk results in the form
of irrelevant documents, the engineers created tools for sorting:
The user can ask the machine to show only documents after a
certain date, those where two keywords appear in proximity, or
documents meeting other criteria.
The elegant simplicity of the latter approach intrigued dataprocessing
specialists because the specialists didn’t need to query
databases manually. Anyone could enter keywords, thus eliminating
the need to prepare and index documents. The hope was that documents
could simply be digitized and stored in a database, available
to be searched.
Language being what it is, however, the latter attempt to automate
search has its disadvantages. For example, if you try to introduce
synonyms or contextual meanings into the database, you create more
volume and false positives. That’s not necessarily a problem as long
as the databases remain specialized within a limited field for use by
professionals (like the legal documents for attorneys stored in Lexis),
but using these programs for searching the Web was another matter.
* Now owned by the Dutch company Reed Elsevier.
14 Chapter 1
When searching the Web, users could find plenty of documents
containing the words they searched for, but there were too many
irrelevant results. As the Web grew, and as more pages were assembled
and indexed, search result quality deteriorated. As Page and Brin
wrote in their 1998 paper titled “The Anatomy of a Large-Scale
Hypertextual Web Search Engine,” “‘Junk results’ often wash out any
results that a user is interested in. In fact, as of November 1997, only
one of the top four commercial search engines finds itself (returns
its own search page in response to its name in the top ten results).”3
To counter this failing, early search engines vacillated between
two solutions. Some limited the size of their databases because adding
pages produced worse results. Others, like Yahoo!, took an approach
based on the thesaurus concept: They created elaborate systems to
categorize and rank sites based on topic. A webmaster wanting to
register a site was told to specify its category with keywords. Once
submitted to Yahoo!, specialists called ontologists would check the
description’s relevance.
The thesaurus method of search posed significant problems.
For example, suppose you typed the word horse into a search box
and then pressed enter for your results. In response, you would see
various search categories, such as Zoology, Sports, Art, and so on.
Visit the Zoology branch and you’d find sites about the animal that
is the horse. Click the Sports track and you’d see pages about horsemanship
and betting. The Art category would take you to sites on
equestrian paintings. The Food section would reveal French recipes
for horse meat. In Politics, you might find a rant by a British activist,
complaining about a French conspiracy to eat his pet. Yahoo!
employed hundreds of workers to analyze and sort web pages this
way according to the thesaurus method, language by language, culture
by culture. Clearly, the thesaurus method was inferior to and
much more time intensive than the automated search method, but
automated search was far more expensive and complex.
Dissatisfied with the current state of search, Page and Brin looked
for, and discovered, a way to automatically classify pages found in
a search by their relevance or rank. Of course, they were not alone
in trying to find a solution to the search problem.
Rebels with a Cause 15
For example, search engines like DirectHit tried to classify sites
according to their cumulative use. If someone followed a link to
a site and stayed a long time, that site was considered to be more
relevant than one that was infrequently and/or briefly visited. This
is how Lycos and HotBot still rank sites today.
Ranking pages by cumulative use has certain advantages over
former methods, but the method also has inherent flaws. For one,
cumulative use is less than reliable. With today’s tabbed browsers that
open several pages simultaneously, a user might keep a page open
for a long time without actually reading it, thus skewing the server
statistics to make them at best unreliable, at worst meaningless. And
it lends itself to cheating. If I want to push my site up on the search
page, all I need to do is write a small robot program that goes to
the site, stays for a few minutes, leaves, and then comes back again
using a different proxy IP number. Catch me if you can.
Like the developers of DirectHit, Page and Brin decided that
reputation was the best way to measure a site’s quality and relevance.
But rather than measure a site according to the number and duration
of hits, they looked at the nature of scientific research and the
importance of citations.
For example, to judge the quality of an author, an idea, or a
concept, researchers check the number of quotations from the
article in scholarly publications and then classify scientific articles
by the number of times they are referred to in other articles. In the
world of the Internet, links to pages are more or less the equivalent
of citations. If I put a link in my text, encouraging readers to load a
page on another site, chances are I consider it important or at least
relevant. By counting the number of links to various pages, a search
engine can classify those pages and obtain more reliable results. This
forms the basis of Google’s search algorithm.
But Google isn’t that simple. For one thing, not all citations
have the same value, nor do all links have the same importance. For
example, a quote in an article written by a Nobel laureate and published
in a prestigious journal has more value than, say, a student’s
article in some little-known school’s newspaper. In the same way,
16 Chapter 1
links coming from pages that are cited often are given more weight
by Google than those coming from pages with few incoming links.
Google added other subtleties as well, such as the distance between
words when a query contains several, and a system of weighting that
gives more value to links from sites with many incoming links but
few outgoing links. This mechanism made it possible to improve
search quality greatly without the need for human intervention.
As obvious as it may appear today, the method requires highly
complex mathematics and involves the integration of several classes
of problems. This is why initial support for Google came mainly from
the scientific community. In fact, Google’s initial success was due to
a mix of programming theory and network sociology. And because
of its novelty, Google qualifies as a genuine invention, which is why
it interested scientific researchers and mathematicians.
This is an important detail. As you’ll read in this book, throughout
Google’s history one of its main strengths has been its ability to
maintain relationships with the academic community. The quality
of these relationships stems from the personalities of the company’s
founders and their contacts with high-level researchers like Terry
Winograd, their former college professor and now a Google consultant.
But Google’s work in areas of inquiry that interest researchers
also enables the company to transform questions posed by its engineers
into problems that mathematicians are eager to solve.
An Environment for Innovation
Entrepreneurs thrive and prosper where there are other entrepreneurs
to nurture them.
And when it comes to serial entrepreneurs, entrepreneurs who
have started company after company, California reigns supreme, with
more entrepreneurs per square mile than any place on earth. And
with those serial entrepreneurs comes venture capital. Seed money.
One of those serial entrepreneurs, Sun founder Andy Bechtolsheim,
put up Google’s first seed money. Rumor has it that after talking to
the Google founders for only a few hours, he wrote them a check for
$100,000—but they couldn’t deposit it immediately because they
hadn’t yet filed the legal papers to establish their company.
Rebels with a Cause 17
If the story is true, Bechtolsheim did more than give Page and
Brin a financial start; he lent them credibility. His buying into their
project sent a message to those who know that serial entrepreneurs
can spot the good ideas. Having created their own companies, serial
entrepreneurs know how to judge the quality of new ventures at
first glance.
When evaluating new ventures for investment, serial entrepreneurs
ask questions about the company like, “Does it meet the needs
of users?” and “Will the money we invest be used prudently?” and
“Is the economic model viable?” Their experience helps reduce the
risk of financing startups and seize real opportunities quickly.
In a 2006 study titled Skill vs. Luck in Entrepreneurship and
Venture Capital: Evidence from Serial Entrepreneurs, Paul Gompers
and colleagues at Harvard University calculated that “entrepreneurs
who succeeded in a prior venture (i.e., started a company that went
public) have a 30% chance of succeeding in their next venture.
By contrast, first-time entrepreneurs have only an 18% chance of
succeeding and entrepreneurs who previously failed have a 20%
chance of succeeding.”4 In a market fraught with high risk, this sort
of expertise is invaluable.
California also offers young entrepreneurs a dense network of
venture capital firms making deals. For example, according to a 2007
Entrepreneur.com ranking of the top 100 early-stage venture capital
firms in the United States by deals made (http://www.entrepreneur
.com/vc100/stage/early.html ), about half of the top 100 firms are in
California. Massachusetts is a distant second with about 25 percent
of the total.
This concentration of venture capital firms makes finding technology
funding in Mountain View, California, a lot easier than it
might be to land capital in Sedona, Arizona, or southern Italy.
Job Mobility and the Exchange of Ideas
Serial entrepreneurs and venture capitalists obviously didn’t appear
out of nowhere. One reason they are more numerous in California
is that the legal environment lends itself to the creation of innovative
companies. Stanford professor Ronald J. Gilson, an expert on Japan
and venture capital, discusses this in an article. In 1996, he analyzed
18 Chapter 1
the contrasting destinies of Silicon Valley and Route 128, the technology
corridor near Boston. There, in the early 1980s, prestigious
universities like MIT spawned most of the great names in technology,
including Wang and DIGITAL.5 But the climate soon changed.
One of the main reasons Silicon Valley flourished while its eastern
counterpart stagnated was that California law prohibits restrictive
noncompete clauses in employment contracts. California companies
can require that employees sign a nondisclosure agreement, stating
they will not exploit the company’s confidential information, but
such an agreement doesn’t prevent anyone from going to work for
a competitor. So engineers who come up with a bright idea that
doesn’t interest the company they’re currently working for can take
it elsewhere or start their own venture.
In most other jurisdictions, a new employee can be required to
sign a contract agreeing not to use any knowledge gained on the job
in case he or she ever goes to work for a competitor. In the case of
a direct competitor, reusing that gained knowledge is often seen as
inevitable, so an engineer who receives a job offer from a competing
firm can be legally prevented from accepting it.
In California, the absence of noncompete clauses thus contributes
to the mobility of people, ideas, and expertise. It supports the
cross-fertilization of innovations and helps new ideas move from the
laboratory into real-world development. It also contributes, perhaps
importantly, to the quality of human resources available in the Valley.
Finally, an ever-growing number of employees aren’t required to
change fields when they change companies. Communities of professional
acquaintances can develop to exchange ideas, advice, and
information about projects. All this leads to increased specialization,
because people who change jobs can continue to work in the same
niche and increase their expertise.
When we think about the influence of human capital on the
development of technology centers, universities are usually seen as key.
Their role is fundamental, of course, but the labor market’s operation
is also a factor. If the market supports mobility and specialization,
as it does in California, the quality of available expertise improves.
In 2000, at the peak of the Internet bubble, three times more teaching
jobs were open in data processing at Stanford than there were
Rebels with a Cause 19
candidates to fill them. All the people who could have filled the
extra jobs were working in the industry. Some experts at the time
warned that if the trend continued, one of California’s strong suits
would be threatened—but that didn’t occur. By encouraging practical,
hands‑on learning, job mobility compensated for education.
A Short Leash
Silicon Valley’s rich environment of universities, serial entrepreneurs,
and venture capitalists makes it a wellspring of technological
innovation. But relationships among joint-risk stock companies
and entrepreneurs are seldom love affairs, and company founders
are often kept on a short leash. Horror stories abound of the predatory
nature of “vulture capitalists,” who neglect the interests of their
startup clients in favor of delivering returns to investors.
Venture capitalists often contribute their experience and expertise
to the companies they finance. As part owners, many actively
participate in the day-to-day management of the companies they
invest in, contributing to strategic position, human resource policies,
organizational structure, product development, and so on.
Many venture capitalists encourage the companies they invest in
to specialize—to concentrate their resources in a single core activity
that (they hope) will support growth (though that specialization also
makes companies more vulnerable to market fluctuations).
Venture capitalists favor business activities that promise the
highest returns because they are investing, after all. For example, in
the life sciences, venture capitalists tend to back the development
of drugs with huge potential markets over those used to treat rare
diseases. They’re wary of business portfolios that contain many
licenses that, although they may require less total investment, will
bring in less projected income.
Venture capitalists also tend to press companies to patent their
inventions in order to increase their intellectual property value and,
hence, their commercial value. Patenting protects products in an
industry that has high employment turnover, and even if the company
disappears, its patents will still have some commercial value.
Patenting and specialization may work for the life sciences, but
when it comes to technology, this strategy has its disadvantages. For
20 Chapter 1
one, over the long term, patenting threatens to slow the movement
and sharing of ideas that have allowed the technology business to
develop so quickly. In the IT industry, technology spillovers have
occurred frequently because intellectual property was poorly protected.
In fact, until the late 1990s, technology companies rarely
filed patent applications for software because companies assumed the
patent applications would automatically be rejected. The algorithms
at the heart of software or that define elements such as interfaces are
like mathematical formulas, which cannot be protected.
Code is protected by copyright law as speech, but accomplishing
the same functions in a particular piece of code by writing similar
code, without actually copying and infringing the original program,
is relatively easy.
Things changed in 1999 when Amazon.com was granted a patent
for “A Method and System for Placing a Purchase Order Via a
Communications Network,” what’s more commonly known as oneclick
ordering. Since then, the United States Patent and Trademark
Office has doled out software patents with increasing frequency,
leading industry observers like Harvard law professor Lawrence
Lessig to call the situation disastrous: “This is a major change that
occurred without anybody thinking through the consequences. In
my view, it is the single greatest threat to innovation in cyberspace,
and I’m extremely skeptical that anybody’s going to get it in time.”6
The birth of so many software patents poses a real threat to
the growth of the IT industry. For better or worse, much of the IT
industry’s progress can be traced to the frail protection of intellectual
property. For example, Microsoft’s Windows interface is a copy of
Apple Computer’s Macintosh operating system, which in turn was
copied from the Xerox Star’s windowed interface.
We can probably safely assume that if data processing industrialists
had been able to protect their intellectual property as well as those
in the automotive or aviation industries did, personal computers
would not be as ubiquitous as they are today. By the same token,
had companies been granted patents for tools like spreadsheet, word
processing, and database programs, we would likely have few, if any,
tools to choose from when working on our personal computers.
Rebels with a Cause 21
Finally, the oversight and influence of venture capital firms on
new businesses contribute to the early and, I would argue, sometimes
premature professionalization of the companies they invest in
as the venture capitalists define compensation policies and bring in
experienced upper-level managers. Certainly, these contributions
support growth, but they also promote conformity. The solutions
that these experienced professionals tend to recommend are, above
all, safe ones that worked at other companies.
And that’s what makes the Google story so interesting. Page and
Brin could not have built Google as we have come to know it if they
had been subject to the heavy supervision interference of venture
capitalists and the pressure to patent and specialize.
Winning Independence
To guarantee their independence, the Google founders played joint
stock-holding companies against one another. After several months of
negotiations and battles, they struck a deal with two venture capital
firms, with each taking equal shares in Google. This odd arrangement
would play a significant role in Google’s future success because
Google immediately doubled its network of contacts and advisors.
But perhaps more importantly, this arrangement relieved the pressure
Page and Brin would have encountered had they worked with
only one investor who would likely have pushed for them to build
a more traditional organization.
Page and Brin demonstrated their independence again at the time
of Google’s initial public offering (IPO). Generally, when a company
goes public, it nearly always turns over the job to investment bankers
who know how to skirt the rules while avoiding trouble with
US Securities and Exchange Commission regulators. These same
bankers also know how to enrich themselves and their cronies as a
result of taking companies public.
The mechanism that the investment bankers use is relatively
simple: Estimate a weak opening price for the stock by taking a
survey of “selected” potential investors. That way, those who buy
shares at the beginning will be able to sell their stock for a profit
once the price rises.
22 Chapter 1
For this mechanism to be fully effective, shares are reserved at
the deflated “opening price” for friends, who then bid up the stock
by trading during the first few days it is on the market. At the same
time, the bankers make sure most potential investors have no access
to the stock beforehand so that demand for the IPO will increase
and investors will be eager to buy.
The few investment bankers who specialize in these IPO manipulations
have become masters at the art of anticipation, touting stocks
during road shows held for likely investors and their financial advisors.
These meetings are part of the services that investment banks
sell to their customers—at very high prices, of course.
Page, Brin, and Eric Schmidt (the manager they ultimately
recruited at the behest of their investors) wanted nothing to do
with investment bankers. Instead, they researched their options
and found a system to avoid those shenanigans: an auction with
sealed bids that would set the price of the stock, also called a Dutch
or Vickrey auction.
In a Dutch auction, the seller sets an opening price and specifies
the number of shares offered for sale. Investors bid by specifying the
quantity of shares they want to buy and the price they are willing
to pay. All investors whose bid is equal to or greater than the offering
price pay the same final price, including those who bid higher.
Investors who bid less than the final price get no stock.
The principles behind this unusual and somewhat elaborate
system were originally formulated by William Vickrey, an economist
who was awarded the Nobel Prize for the concept in 1996. They’ve
since been put to use by William Hambrecht, a well-known Silicon
Valley financier whose previous investment bank had contributed
to the financing of companies like Apple, Genentech, and Sybase.
In 1999, Hambrecht sold his firm (Hambrecht & Quist) to
Chase Manhattan Corporation. Through his new company, WR
Hambrecht + Co, he began capitalizing companies with a Vickreyinspired
method he termed OpenIPO, a transparent allusion to open
source. His first client in 1999 was a vineyard, Ravenswood Winery.
Following a successful IPO, he took several more companies public
using his OpenIPO system, including Salon, the Internet magazine.
Rebels with a Cause 23
These were fine companies, whose IPOs brought in tens of millions
of dollars, but they were modest in size when compared with Google.
The remarkable feature of the OpenIPO bidding system is that
it discourages auction hysteria and brings a measure of prudence
to the IPO. Buyers know that the higher their bid, the better their
chances of ending up with the number of shares they want. But at
the same time, bidders know that they have a good chance of paying
less than their offer because the ultimate IPO price precipitates the
sale of all shares. In this way, OpenIPO contradicts standard auction
practices, as announcing the final price a buyer is willing to pay up
front is advantageous. Buyers can do so with confidence, knowing
they won’t pay more than necessary.
When the Google founders chose OpenIPO as their method
of going public, bypassing the traditional investment bankers,
they caused quite an uproar in the investment community, which
complained bitterly about the perceived arrogance of Google’s two
young founders. The trade press was also skeptical, lambasting Page
and Brin when Playboy magazine published an interview with the
founders in the September 2004 issue—during the mandatory quiet
period, when they were prohibited from making public statements.
Even though, according to Playboy, the interview had been conducted
on April 22, 2004 (Page and Brin announced the IPO on April 29,
2004), the publication of their interview during the quiet period
amounted to an involuntary violation. Page and Brin took the heat
in many news articles.
But the auction IPO and this perceived quiet period violation
weren’t the only things that riled the investment community. Also
irksome was the fact that Page and Brin had engineered a way for
top management to retain a majority of votes on most issues using
a two-tiered voting system. This two-tiered system is commonly used
in Europe but rarely seen in the United States, where only media
companies use it to ensure their editorial independence. The system
is based on the assumption that a brand’s founders have a long-term
stake in its reputation that outweighs the interests of financiers or
transitory stockholders.
24 Chapter 1
As a demonstration of their independence, Page published an
open “Letter from the Founders” (co-signed by Brin) to potential
investors, stating in part that “Google is not a conventional company.
We do not intend to become one.” Consequently, he wanted
investors committed for the long term. “As a private company, we
have concentrated on the long term, and this has served us well. As
a public company, we will do the same.”7 These words are fraught
with mistrust of the financial markets and dismissive of the mercenary
decisions typically dictated by Wall Street. The financial
community was furious.
By choosing unconventional methods, Page and Brin wanted to
avoid diluting their voting power and to ensure their ability to pursue
long-term objectives unencumbered and without interference. By
using the OpenIPO mechanism to invite investors to name a price
they considered fair, their bidding system helped attract investors
who were committed to Google’s best interests and its future success.
Also, by making buyers rather than investment bankers the judges
of a fair stock price, they effectively enhanced their company’s value.
What About the Rest of Us?
People often wonder whether the Google experiment can be replicated
elsewhere. That is, can it really be used as a model, or did Page and
Brin just come along at the right time and understand how to take
advantage of the entrepreneurial climate in Silicon Valley?
As I explore that question throughout this book, remember that
Google was created largely by bucking that system. In fact, Page and
Brin developed an organization with management methods that
contradict most of what they were told to do by venture capitalists
and other Silicon Valley professionals.
Entrepreneurs are often depicted as heroes or adventurers, more
willing to take risks than the average executive. That sounds romantic,
but the image is pretty far from reality. In fact, successful entrepreneurs
tend to be risk averse and to take only a few, calculated risks.
In creating their company, Page and Brin took few risks. As
students, they weren’t leaving good jobs to venture into unknown
territory, as Jeff Bezos did when he founded Amazon.com. Educated
Rebels with a Cause 25
at Stanford University, a school known for nurturing entrepreneurs,
in an area of the United States filled with venture capitalists and new
businesses, they had little to lose if they failed.
They succeeded because they had the self-assurance to buck the
trends, to not conform. If any one characteristic distinguishes Page
and Brin, it is probably their desire for independence and autonomy.
They are more creators than gamblers. They invented a new model
of organization and management strategy that can be applied elsewhere,
either in whole or in part, whether to your nascent business
or a larger corporation. That process has already begun, as you’ll
discover in the rest of this book.

2
The Google Economic Model
Like network television shows and other search
engines, Google is free but with certain strings
attached. For example, the “free” programs on network
television are only free to view if you own a
television set or a computer—and then only if you
pay your electricity bill. You’ll also have to watch
commercials (or work to avoid them) if you still
want to watch the programs for “free.” In the same
way, the Internet is not “free” for most people, who
28 Chapter 2
pay to subscribe through a service provider. Although you may not
notice the cost because you get so much in return, somebody pays for
everything. This reality disproves the fallacy of getting something
for nothing.
Google Is Free, But . . .
After that cautionary note, let’s examine some “free stuff ” in economic
terms. Anthropologists first explored this concept with Marcel
Mauss’s analysis of the potlatch, a Native American ceremony where
a tribe hosts a festival and lavishes gifts on the guests who are then
expected to reciprocate later. This practice constitutes a gift economy,
with rituals involving exchanges of property and prestige through
symbology and relationships.1
The Native American potlatch custom is one example of an
economy based on gift exchange. More contemporary examples
include open source software, which is free software developed by
groups of dedicated but unpaid volunteers. The creators of open
source software give users the source code for their program and
the right to use, copy, modify, and improve it. In exchange, the creators
expect users’ contributions to improve the program, whether
those contributions are simply comments and suggestions or actual
development and testing.
Traditional scientific research is another example of a gift economy.
Scientists publish their research in print journals or online and
present their results at conferences. Other scientists cite their work,
and the researchers become more prestigious within the scientific
community as the number of citations to their work increases. The
scientific community benefits from the increased pool of knowledge,
and individual scientists benefit from their growing status and the
awarding of more grants or funding.
One final example of gift economics might be what are known
as captive sales techniques. Manufacturers of inkjet printers give the
printers away or sell them at ridiculously low prices, knowing they
will get a return later by selling ink cartridges.
The Google Economic Model 29
Two-Sided Markets
Search engines, which finance free search results by selling advertising,
use what economists call a two-sided market (sometimes called
a double-sided market). All media—including television, radio,
magazines, and newspapers—would be far more expensive if it
weren’t for advertising revenues. Other business sectors apply similar
techniques: Your credit card appears to be free (or almost free) when
you use it for purchases, but the merchant accepting the card pays
a fee to the company that issued it and you, of course, pay interest
if you carry a balance.
In every case—search engine, newspaper, or credit card—the
company offers its products or services to two markets: reader and
advertiser or customer and merchant. The more subscriptions or
placements the company accumulates in the first market, the more
services the company can sell to the second market. The more readers
a newspaper has, the more ad pages it sells to advertisers. The more
cardholders Visa has, the greater the number of merchants that will
accept the card.
When companies adopt a two-sided market model, their challenge
is to find the right balance between a price that will allow
them to maximize product placements while still enabling them to
sell services effectively.
Search engine companies vacillated for a long time between
offering completely free services and selling low-cost subscriptions.
The free service model won, largely because of the overhead
that subscription transactions would have required. For example,
if Internet searches had been based on paid subscriptions, users
would have had to enter some sort of payment information and
remember various passwords. The cost in lost users in addition to
the transaction costs might actually have impeded the development
of Internet search tools.
By offering their services for free, the large search engines created
a climate that encouraged fast growth. An advertising market was
created so companies like Yahoo! and Excite, as well as their early
competitors who wanted to give their service away, could generate
revenue by selling ad space at high rates.
30 Chapter 2
The Cost-per-Click Advertising Model
Google found another way to generate ad revenue—the company’s
co-founders borrowed the cost-per-click system from Overture
Services, Inc. Overture, created in 1998 under the name GoTo,
offered advertisers the option to bid on how much they would be
willing to pay to appear at the top of search results. Advertisers paid
a fee each time someone clicked a link to their website.
Google combined this model with contextual ad display, wherein
an ad appears only when a user’s query matches keywords chosen
by the advertiser within specified geographical areas. Google also
decided to let advertisers decide how much they wanted to pay per
click. Here, economists will recognize the principle of price differentiation
formulated by the engineer-economist Jules Dupuit in
1849: “To set a price for a service, don’t base it on what it costs the
provider, but instead set the price according to the importance of
the service to the user.”2
By adopting a cost-per-click strategy, Google limited advertiser
risk and reduced the uncertainty connected with all mass advertising.
Essentially this change was a tweak of a detail, but it was a major
breakthrough.
Google’s engineers discovered one of the best kept business
secrets: Advertisers generally can’t evaluate the effectiveness of an
ad campaign. In fact, according to a 2005 study by the Association
of National Advertisers (ANA):3
• Seventy-three percent of managers did not know how to determine
an ad campaign’s effect on sales.
• Only 19 percent of managers were satisfied with their ability to
measure the return on investment from advertising.
• More significantly, 63 percent could not estimate the potential
impact on sales if their advertising budget was reduced by
10 percent.
Uncertainty affects all advertisers, but especially small ones
who lack the resources to buy or perform market research on their
ads’ effectiveness. These small advertisers—individual consultants,
The Google Economic Model 31
small businesses, and specialized companies that can’t afford mass
media—were the ones Google attracted early on.
With traditional media such as newspapers, radio, and TV, the
advertiser pays according to the size of the audience that might see
an ad. The equivalent measure on the Internet is cost per thousand
(CPM )* page views when an ad is displayed.
A CPM pricing strategy favors advertisers with the most money
because only they can afford to pay for media with large audiences.
The overall cost is high, but the cost per impression is very low.
When the cost of advertising is based on audience size, for example,
a 30-second commercial on CBS is less expensive per impression
than a four-color, full-page ad in a magazine with only a few thousand
readers.
By tying payment to a result, cost-per-click changed the rules of
the game. Small-budget advertisers get less exposure than those who
spend more, but they aren’t entirely excluded from the medium. If
they plan skillfully and create effective ads, they may do very well.
In fact, Google gives priority to ads that get the best results.
Advertisers bid on keywords or phrases and set a budget for their
ad campaign. Ads that are clicked more often, using the same
keywords, appear higher on the page. As a result, although one
advertiser may bid more than another for a particular keyword or
phrase, that advertiser’s ad may appear higher on the page because
users click it more often. While the cost-per-click (CPC ) is often
higher than CPM’s cost per audience member, in the world of CPC
an advertiser’s financial clout is less important than ad quality and
its ability to attract potential customers. Because advertisers decide
what they are willing to spend, even advertisers with tiny budgets
can buy advertising.
This strategy has proven to be very powerful. According to
Anil Kamath, chief technology officer of Efficient Frontier, Inc., a
search-engine marketing firm in Mountain View, California, in 2006
Google earned about 30 percent more revenue per ad impression
than Yahoo! did. (Yahoo! sold space to the highest bidder until it
announced a similar bidding system in early 2007.)4
* Here M represents the Roman numeral for 1,000.
32 Chapter 2
The Power of Minimalist Ads
Overture may have invented CPC, but Google created a new advertising
paradigm by selling minimalist ads of 10 to 15 words, including
the URL for the advertiser’s website. Known as AdWords, the
ads in the right column of a Google search results page look more
like classified ads in a newspaper than like glitzy TV commercials.
These little rectangles are unobtrusive and, in fact, nearly invisible
by normal advertising standards.
Not only did Google refuse to sell any advertising on its home
page, but it also relegated advertising literally to the margins. This
placement avoids frustrating people who come looking for answers,
so the vast majority of users who have no interest in the ads aren’t
exasperated. At the same time, someone who finds information
about an offering that seems relevant to his or her search can get
more information about it with a single click.
This choice dismayed advertising people who were used to creating
ads designed to startle viewers and grab their attention. They had
to find new ways of earning their living, and many did, by selling
search engine optimization. Part of search engine optimization ( SEO )
involves determining the best keywords to use to target a particular
audience in order to get the most traffic and conversions. The advice
and tools developed by SEO specialists is certainly useful, but a small
business owner can still write his or her own ads without paying for
that advice. The ads themselves cost nothing to produce, and they
can be revised at any time with a few minutes of thought.
Google’s choice to offer this advertising format was another contrarian
stroke of genius, though the basis for the decision probably
had more to do with the founders’ paradoxical aversion to publicity
than it did to any economic rationale. Because they put the performance
of their search engine first, they didn’t want advertisements
to compromise the results. At best, banners would distract users
who came seeking information; at worst, users might be tricked
into mistaking an ad for a search result.
Ads That Inform Rather Than Persuade
The minimalism of Google’s ads offers several benefits. For one,
response to the ad is direct and immediate. Users see an interesting
The Google Economic Model 33
headline and then click the ad to visit the site or buy the product.
In addition, time to transaction is much shorter, and advertisers
can quickly measure the performance of their campaign and the
cost of sale.
Unlike persuasive ads in traditional mass media, which try to
attract consumers to brands and gain their loyalty, Google ads are
mostly informative. Persuasive ads usually want to change consumer
habits—get them to switch from a manual razor to an electric
shaver, from fabric handkerchiefs to paper tissues, from soap to gel.
Informative ads, on the other hand, mainly provide product information,
including features, uses, benefits, and prices. They attempt to
convince consumers by appealing to reason—by providing consumers
with facts that make them want to buy. Because Google ads offer
very limited space (95 characters total at this writing), advertisers
must attract viewers with just a few keywords: They must get right
to the point.
The exclusive use of informative ads changes the rules of the
game, giving advertisers without the massive financial resources often
necessary to build a brand name more opportunities. Informative
ads decrease the need for the incessant repetition that persuasive ads
require to be effective—the assumption being that the more often
an ad is seen, the more likely consumer behavior will change. In
other words, the more people see a message repeated, the more likely
they will be to change how they shave, their brand of detergent, or
the car they drive.
With informative advertising, the story is different. Once people
have the information, they will eventually make a purchase or they
won’t. Viewers have no reason to click again and revisit the same site.
This allows an advertiser with a modest budget to run an effective
ad campaign on Google.
Automating Ads Reduces Overhead, Not Confidence
For Google to have built a sales force to reach small advertisers using
conventional methods of ad sales would have cost a fortune. Google
could never have launched its venture by hiring salespeople to sell
ads; the cost of selling the ads would have been far greater than the
income from selling those ads.
34 Chapter 2
AdWords succeeded because Google had the good sense to
automate the ad placement process, thereby drastically reducing the
cost of sales. Automation eliminates the need for sales reps; instead,
customers come directly to Google. Whether large or small, experienced
or inexperienced, any advertiser can construct an ad campaign
without human intervention.
Of course, in order to make its automated advertising system
work, Google had to gain the confidence of its surfer-merchants,
many who were initially resistant to or confused by the concept.
After all, trusting faceless and voiceless interactions with a company
can be difficult, never mind paying via the Internet, too.
Paying via the Internet could have been an obstacle were it not
for two features built into the system.
The first feature is simply the elegance of the process. Like the
intuitive Macintosh GUI that makes Apple products so friendly and
easy to use, the design and user-friendliness of Google’s AdWords
interface has helped make it a winner. Any advertiser can easily
understand how ads are placed and how to place an ad by following
the step-by-step directions.
The second feature is more subtle. Page and Brin understood
early on that people trust machines at least as much as they trust
other human beings (this confidence in computers is typical of
Silicon Valley). In other parts of the United States or the world,
people might have hesitated, wondering whether customers would
really trust machines.
Brin and Page believed that people would trust machines, perhaps
because they were familiar with the work of Joseph Weizenbaum.
Weizenbaum, a founder of artificial intelligence (who later became
one its harshest critics, largely because so much research was financed
by the Pentagon), was one of the first to highlight the singular and
strange relationship between man and machine—or rather, computer
program. In the early 1950s, he designed a computer program that
allowed a human being to converse with a machine. Much to his
surprise, he discovered that ordinary people “become emotionally
involved with the computer and . . . anthropomorphize it.”5 But even
if Page and Brin hadn’t read Weizenbaum, they certainly worked with
researchers who had looked further into the relationship between
The Google Economic Model 35
human and machine and similarly discovered that “an individual’s
interactions with computers and television sets are fundamentally
social and natural, just like interactions in real life.”6 Many studies
have shown that the rules of reciprocity and courtesies that govern our
contacts with friends are also used in our interactions with machines.
Page and Brin set out to design a computer-based system that
would create a comfortable and familiar environment and, in the
case of financial transactions, mimic the mechanisms people rely
on to build confidence in a relationship: Specifically, a person follows
a learning curve, gradually engaging as he or she gains more
experience. People are prudent, starting with small risks, and they
are most comfortable when they have a way to back out quickly in
case of disappointment. The next section takes a meticulous look at
Google’s payment methods for advertising, which clearly demonstrate
that programmers took human transactions as the starting point.
Competitive Bidding
When setting the payment structure for Google ads, following a
model like Yahoo!’s and setting a standard cost-per-click would
have been simple. Instead, using Overture’s example, Google chose
a bidding system. Advertisers compete for keywords, and the more
they do, the higher the price of the keyword.
Instead of using traditional ascending bids, as practiced in auction
houses, Google’s leaders chose a system in which the bidder
states the maximum price he or she is ready to pay for a keyword.
This price remains confidential, known only to Google. The sale is
made to the person making the highest bid, but at the next highest
price. The system encourages bidders to indicate the price they
are actually ready to pay because keeping it secret from the seller
offers no benefit; this system also prevents collusion because bids
are confidential.
The AdWords bidding system resembles the method used for
the Google IPO, but the system differs in two important ways. First,
bidding is continuous; the goal is to buy not a product, stock, or
contract, but a position on a screen that may change constantly. This
encourages advertisers to experiment, vary their list of keywords and
settings, and correct their initial decision. They can, in other words,
36 Chapter 2
train themselves by tinkering. The gains from improvements can be
significant. As early as 2004, two Australian researchers (Brendan
Kitts and Benjamin Leblanc) demonstrated that modifications could
multiply an ad’s effectiveness by four times.7
The bidding mechanism may appear complex at first glance, but
most of the complexity happens on the Google side. Advertisers are
led through the process of setting a budget and their maximum bid
price for keywords; Google performs the calculations.
By assigning advertisers higher positions based on both what they
pay and the effectiveness of their ad (multiplying the payment price
by the click-through rate and ranking ads according to the result),
Google encourages advertisers to invest time in learning to compose
effective ads, with both parties directly benefiting.
The bidding process also offers many advantages to both the
customer and Google. For one, bidding eliminates rate negotiations
between advertisers and salespeople as well as concerns about
price increases, and it makes billing simple and more transparent.
The customer decides how much to pay, and the market determines
the price.
Google has seen a direct benefit from the bidding process, too.
In fact, the average price of Google’s ads has probably risen higher
than it would have if Google had fixed its ad prices. According to
advertisers interviewed by MarketWatch in 2007, keyword search
prices on many terms had risen between 40 and 60 percent in 2006.8
Of course, bidding success requires that advertisers spend time
learning the process and the rules of the game. But this time is not
lost: Well-chosen keywords result in more clicks, more visitors to
advertiser websites, and more revenue for Google.
No Content, No Portal
Had they taken the advice of experts, Page and Brin would have
built a portal site with multiple services, just like their principal
competitors. They chose to do just the opposite instead—to produce
no content on their own, focusing instead on offering tools to find
or produce content.
The Google Economic Model 37
This daring, counterintuitive choice allows Google to economize
by not hiring journalists, graphic designers, and web developers to
build a content-based portal and to concentrate its modest resources
instead on the core business, the search engine, while competitors
divide their energy between search and newsroom activities.
One side benefit of Google’s choice to not offer content is that it
eliminates the problem that advertising-supported media face when
advertisers get upset about a journalist bad-mouthing their product.
The relationship between advertisers and media is a delicate one
that creates conflicts between reporters who demand the freedom
to criticize and publishers who are worried about losing advertising
accounts. Most media deal with this conflict in the simplest way
possible—by not critiquing consumer products.
Certainly, objective criticism of products has a market, as
demonstrated by the popularity of customer reviews on sites like
Amazon.com, news stories that expose frauds of all types, and
magazines like Consumer Reports (which carries no advertising).
Although radio and television broadcasts or newspaper columns
critiquing the products bought every day would surely be successful,
they would continually endanger the income of the stations or
newspapers that run them.
Unlike other ad-supported media, Google doesn’t owe anything
to its advertisers, so it can run any ad, anywhere, whether that ad
appears alongside links to sites that criticize the products or services
being advertised. This means significantly lower overhead because
No Shortage of Content
Although Google doesn’t generate its own content, the company very
actively develops and purchases tools to offer individuals ways to create
web-based content, whether that content is contained in a Blogger blog;
an article in Knol, Google’s “Wikipedia killer”; a website created with
Google Sites; a video posted to YouTube; pictures displayed on Picasa;
or code hosted by Google Code. And the list goes on. Thanks to these
free tools, anyone can produce and publish content that attracts visitors
and offers more opportunities for Google to serve up ads.
38 Chapter 2
ad placement is automated, so staffers do not need to evaluate
where each ad runs. This also causes fewer headaches and maintains
integrity, even though Google itself does not produce any content.
But Google’s lack of original content has a risk, too. Without
content or a web portal to act as home base, Google’s visitors remain
on the Google site only long enough to find the link they’re looking
for and then move on. This might be one reason that Google has
diversified into other, stickier products, like Maps, Mail, and News,
and offers its own web browser, Chrome, as a way to capture and
keep visitors.
How to Keep Channel Surfers
Channel surfing is a natural outgrowth of the free information movement
that encourages the curious to hop from channel to channel
or from site to site. But when your core business is selling ads, how
do you capture maximum revenues if you keep losing visitors?
How do you get Internet surfers to return to pages with ads when
you don’t offer content and when the goal of your search engine is
to find pages that interest searchers and send them to those pages
as quickly as possible? Let’s look at four strategies that characterize
Google’s formula for success:
Free search Google’s first solution to this problem was to
encourage site owners to add a free Google search engine to
their pages. After all, how can anyone find what he or she is
looking for on a large site without a search tool? By giving away
what others had tried to sell, Google gained a massive presence
on the Web that increased brand awareness and referrals to the
Google home page.
AdSense A second solution was AdSense, a revenue-producing
program for site owners that accounted for 30 percent of Google’s
ad sales revenue in 2008. AdSense crawls the content of pages and
automatically delivers ads that relate to them. Each time a visitor
clicks a Google ad placed on a page, the site owner receives part
of the payment. As a secondary benefit, the program provides
a way to remunerate site authors without infringing copyright
and provides incentives to increase free content.
The Google Economic Model 39
Free tools A third way that Google keeps visitors is with tools
designed to become a part of the web surfer’s daily life. These
include communication tools like Gmail and Google Talk, planning
and organization tools like Google Calendar and Google
Maps, productivity tools like Google Notes and Google Docs,
analysis tools like Google Metrics and Google Trends, mapping
tools like Google Earth and Google Sky, and so on. Each of these
services is designed to exploit the potential of a search and to offer
more ways to attract and keep visitors—and advertisers—within
reach of Google properties.
Ubiquity Finally, Google intends to expand its reach by being
everywhere. On your cell phone or PDA (with the G1 cell
phone and mobile apps), computer, and even in your car (with
the GPS-connected Google Maps and handsfree voice search).
By expanding the company’s reach, Google stands to expand
its revenue as well.
The Double Long Tail
By empowering advertisers who would otherwise have little or no
access to the mass media due to their limited financial resources,
Google has democratized advertising and dramatically expanded its
base of ad revenue. Today, a very large part of its sales revenue comes
from hundreds of thousands of advertisers who would be considered
too small for traditional media to cater to.
In his work The Long Tail, Chris Anderson describes a “long
tail” as the very long, gentle slope of a graph comparing number
of receipts per user and total number of users.9 On the graph, the
long slope is shown in light gray. The farther you go along the line,
the lower the amount of each sale made to each advertiser, but the
greater the number of advertisers paying these small amounts. Taken
in aggregate, each of those smaller advertisers adds up to a very
significant whole.
By broadening search into every conceivable market and monetizing
each minor search with nickel- and dime-sized ad revenue,
Google capitalizes on this concept of the long tail. But that’s only
part of the story.
40 Chapter 2
The long tail phenomenon describes a statistical distribution
called a Power Law, or a Pareto distribution, which has been described
in many forms over the years. This distribution is also called the 80/20
rule (meaning that 80 percent of a machine’s malfunctions will be
caused by the failures of 20 percent of its parts) as well as Zipf ’s law
or Lévy’s general distribution. In these statistical distributions, found
in many variations, a small number of things (words in a language
or malfunctions) occur very often, and the greatest number occur
less often. If the slope is fairly long, these infrequent phenomena,
in total, can represent a volume as large or larger than those that
occur more frequently.
It seems clear that by lowering search costs and increasing the
availability of products, the Internet could substantially increase the
collective market share of niche products, thereby creating a longer
tail in the distribution of sales. For example, several academic studies
have since confirmed Anderson’s theory while also demonstrating
that the long tail applies to many products. For example, in their
2004 study, Kohli and Sah found evidence of a long tail in food
and sporting goods.10 Additionally, they found evidence that online
recommendations can alter buyer behavior, which is also supported
by the work of two researchers who, based on a study of Amazon.com
data, concluded that “doubling the average influence of recommendations
on a category is associated with an average increase in
the relative demand for the least popular 20% of products by about
50%, average, and a reduction in the relative demand for the most
popular 20% by about 12%.”11
The long tail
Popularity
Products
The Google Economic Model 41
Academic research also reveals that the concept of the long tail
does not preclude the emergence of blockbusters. Instead, it suggests
that blockbusters will continue to emerge but that they will no
longer be exclusively produced by large firms. For example, Tucker
and Zhang showed that popularity information (that is, information
on the frequency with which a product has been chosen, such as
the sales rank on Amazon.com) “may in fact benefit niche products
disproportionately.”12
Large firms have not ignored these market realities. Many have
responded by transferring a significant part of their advertising budget
to the Web. Several market analysts, such as Nick Brien, CEO
of Universal McCann, even predict a massive transfer of budgets.
To quote McCann, “big name brand marketers are fed up with
traditional media channels and are threatening to shift the lion’s
share of their budgets online.” Brien added that several large firms
are “just waiting to increase their online to spend 50% or 60% [of
their total budgets].”13
Recent statistics, as reported by TNS Media Intelligence,
would seem to suggest confirmation of the transfer of advertising
expenditures from traditional media to the Web, as shown in the
table below.
Percent of Total Expenditures on Types of Advertising
Media Q1 2008/Q1 2007 (US Market)
Television 2.1%
Magazine −3.9%
Newspaper −10.0%
Internet 7.0%
Radio −8.8%
Outdoor −0.5%
Source: TNS Media Intelligence, 2008
Taken as a whole, we can see that Google could benefit from the
long tail twice: First, with revenue from small advertisers; second,
with increasing revenue from the major players striving to keep
market share. As Eric Schmidt noted in 2005: “The surprising thing
42 Chapter 2
about the Long Tail is just how long the tail is, and how many businesses
have been served by traditional advertising sales.”14 And, as
he explained in a interview with The McKinsey Quarterly, three years
later: “While the tail is very interesting, the vast majority of revenue
remains in the head.”15
A significant proportion of revenues is in the head, but only
because the long tail has plunged large enterprises into a more competitive
world where they have to fight for market share.
Part II
A Formula 1 Engine

Ford invented the $5 day and the moving
assembly line, and Toyota became
the world’s premier manufacturer by
revolutionizing inventory management,
quality control, and problem
solving in manufacturing. Brin, Page,
and Schmidt broke barriers that can
inhibit innovation and slow growth
in large companies by acting on several
fronts: people management, product
conception, team organization,
46 A Formula 1 Engine
metrics, and monitoring. They found new ways to motivate and
coordinate employees, mobilize innovative resources, and limit the
complexity that hinders the rapid release of new products.
3
Three Iconoclasts at the Top
Had the leaders of Google followed the rules and
undergone the typical venture capital rite of passage,
they would have written a business plan that laid
out a detailed financial model showing how they
would make money and how long it would take to
make a profit for their initial investors.
They did nothing of the sort. Instead, they started
by creating user demand and only then did they
consider how to generate income.
48 Chapter 3
Is this paradoxical? Undoubtedly. Would this model be difficult
to re-create elsewhere? Certainly. In fact, their venture was made
possible only because, at the outset, they found confident investors
who were willing to wait and because they were brash enough to
make their search engine free without first trying to earn money.
Their primary goal was to produce high-quality results first—to make
Google’s search engine so much better than competing engines that
it would attract hordes of visitors. And it worked.
Google was undoubtedly lucky: The company was born into a
favorable environment, it had patient investors, and it had a large
fan club of devoted users on its side. But none of that would have
been enough had Google not figured out how to do things differently,
starting from the top.
Google built an original system of corporate governance based
on a triumvirate that allowed the company to develop and shielded
it from shareholder pressures that could have derailed it.
A Triumvirate That Works ( Against All Odds )
No management authority would have advised Google to install
a triumvirate as top management. When we think of corporate
governance, common corporate wisdom tells us to have one leader
at the top: a CEO to direct the company and take the fall if things
don’t go as planned. Triangular relationships have a bad reputation,
dating back to the failed triumvirates of ancient Rome.*
Strangely enough though, things went well after Page and Brin
recruited Eric Schmidt in 2001 from Novell, Inc., where he led
strategic planning, management, and technology development as
chairman and CEO.
Whereas a typical startup would have divided areas of authority,
with Schmidt in charge of the company’s management and the
co‑founders in charge of vision and technology, Page and Brin created
a three-headed, power-sharing directorate instead.
* The Roman Senate engineered two restructurings that created triumvirates to resolve personality
conflicts among pretenders to the throne. The first was Julius Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus, and then
many years later, Octavian, Mark Antony, and Lepidus. Both attempts were utter failures that led to war.
Three Iconoclasts at the Top 49
By all accounts (and against conventional wisdom), this structure
has played a critical and positive role on several occasions. The
triumvirate approach is so far out of the ordinary that many experts
are taken aback—yet it works. Why does the Google triumvirate
work when so many others have failed? Its success is probably due in
large part to the ability it gives the others to apply the brakes when
success inflates the ego of any one of the leaders.
Anyone who has followed leaders in the technology field knows
of narcissistic leaders like Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, and Larry Ellison.
Certainly these leaders have had tremendous success, but they can
also cause tremendous shifts in organizational performance, with
their companies experiencing higher highs and lower lows. And
they’re notoriously difficult to work for.
According to their 2007 study titled “It’s All About Me,”
Chatterjee and Hambrick conclude that narcissism is particularly
prevalent among CEOs in the field of new technology.1 Among
Google’s three leaders, however, anyone who is tempted to play
God is quickly held to account by the checks and balances of the
other two leaders.
Google’s triumvirate structure also makes reversing errors more
quickly possible. A manager alone at the head of a company may
be reluctant to correct his or her decisions, even when those decisions
are clearly incorrect, due to hubris or a fear of losing his or her
position. The triumvirate is less likely to suffer from this problem.
Because a triumvirate shares responsibility, when the triumvirate
makes decisions, you can never quite pin down who really made
that bad decision, and the likelihood of any one person taking the
blame is significantly reduced.
Note Of course, the triumvirate always runs the risk of two leaders
turning against the third one, but when the structure works, it
offers significant advantages.
A triumvirate structure supplies multiple viewpoints, perspectives,
and expertise, which can help to reassure investors and customers
that someone at the top of the company understands and shares
their concerns. For example, Google shareholders may assume that
50 Chapter 3
Schmidt will defend their economic interests, whereas users place
confidence in Page and Brin to resist market pressures and to focus
the company’s direction on producing a quality product.
Finally, a triumvirate can change the balance of power at the
top: Three managers can better resist pressure from shareholders and
investors than can one person alone.
By adopting this mutual scheme of governance, with oversight
by their peers, Google’s leaders are freed from outside influences on
corporate policies. The pull that middle management, the technocracy,
and outside consultants generally exert on large companies,
where all decision making is preceded by lengthy discussion and
deliberation, is avoided.
As puzzling as this may seem, by agreeing to work under a system
of mutual monitoring, Page, Brin, and Schmidt are actually freer.
They’ve loosened constraints that, under the guise of reducing risk
and forcing rational decisions, put leaders of most large companies
under the control of investors, associates, and advisors. At the same
time, they maximize the freedom needed to build a company that
doesn’t hesitate to break traditional management rules.
As a prerequisite for improving company performance, most
treatises on corporate governance emphasize putting strict controls
on leaders to limit their room to maneuver. The leaders of Google,
however, have been able to find a formula that both preserves broad
margins of autonomy for them as a trio and allows them to avoid
some of the faults frequently found in leaders who are surrounded by
compliant underlings. And, perhaps not least of all, the triumvirate
structure guarantees continuity in case one leader should unexpectedly
step aside.
Three Iconoclasts at the Top 51
How Can Google’s Triumvirate Continue to Succeed?
Historically, triumvirates have failed because they were formed to
avoid wars of succession, with each player retaining the ambition
to become Numero Uno. Most triumvirates set up in modern companies
as a result of mergers or acquisitions have suffered the same
fate. Google’s triumvirate management structure has succeeded so
far for these uncommon reasons:
Qualified leadership All three leaders at Google are qualified
to act as top executives. Page and Brin are the company’s founders;
Schmidt has directed other large companies.
Mutual respect Eric Schmidt never misses a chance to say how
impressed he is by the intelligence of his two younger colleagues.
Shared values All three leaders of Google are engineers by
training. All appreciate the rigor of mathematical reasoning, have
confidence in technology, and share the same view of money:
They have no problem with making a lot of it, but doing so is
not an obsession.
Different perspectives Each leader has a different perspective.
Schmidt is focused on administration; Page pays close attention
to the company’s social structure; and Brin is in charge of ethical
matters. Schmidt is the one who generally speaks to financial
analysts, whereas Brin was the spokesperson when it came time
to rethink the conditions of entry into the Chinese market.
Only time will tell, of course, but few would argue that Google
is off to an inauspicious start.

4
Recruiting the Best
My job can be so exciting. I get to work with some of the
brightest minds and most accomplished luminaries in technology,
politics, and business. I am consistently humbled
and feel lucky for the opportunities I get.1
—Christopher Sacca, former Head of Special Initiatives,
Google, Inc.
Few companies have expressed so strongly and
repeatedly their desire to recruit only the best
people. Google’s recruitment web pages abound
with mantras like “Google seeks to hire only the
best.” Although reports are that Google has had
to relax its hiring policies a bit over the years with
54 Chapter 4
its dramatic increase in number of employees, headhunters who
have worked with Google make it clear that you have little chance
of being hired without a doctorate or at least a master’s degree from
a top school.
This elitism, the object of ongoing jokes, is not exclusive to
Google; the same holds true at Amazon.com and Microsoft. For
example, in a 1993 interview, Bill Gates, then CEO of Microsoft,
made these remarks, which the owners of Google could repeat
verbatim today:
The key for us, number one, has always been hiring very
smart people. There is no way of getting around, that in
terms of I.Q., you’ve got to be very elitist in picking the
people who deserve to write software. Ninety-five percent
of the people shouldn’t write complex software. And using
small teams helps a lot. You’ve got to give great tools to
those small teams. So, pick good people, use small teams,
give them excellent tools, vast compilation, debugging,
lots of machines, profiling technology, so that they are very
productive in terms of what they are doing. Make it very
clear what they can do to change the spec. Make them feel
like they are very much in control of it.2
Why the Very Best?
This elitist attitude needs to be considered within the singular context
of the technology industry and its fast-growing companies.
At Google, as in all booming firms, a position’s scope expands
rapidly: An employee may be promoted several times during the
years following the start of his or her initial employment. In these
circumstances, hiring overqualified people is better. And that means
choosing the best.
But that’s not the only motive for choosing the best people.
Academic qualifications reveal a candidate’s psychological profile.
When times are good, tech companies besiege universities trying
to hire away their students. Those who remain in school to do
graduate work are not only more intelligent and better trained than
average—which are already plus points—but also more impassioned
and motivated. Immediate money is not their main goal.
Recruiting the Best 55
These candidates have already shown that they prefer learning to
paid employment. The fact that they stayed in school long enough to
earn a graduate degree means they already turned down numerous
offers to earn fast money as developers—so, in these cases, staying
in school long enough to get an advanced degree shows strength of
character. Recruiting people with graduate degrees is a way to hire
those who are highly motivated and value the quality of their work
above their immediate personal interests. In an industry with very
high turnover, where fortunes can be made quickly, this factor is
important.
Equally important, new hires with graduate degrees are more
rigorous in their habits. There’s a joke about how doctoral graduates
of the École Polytechnique, France’s most elite school, put their
everyday life into equations. What’s certain about recruiting people
with PhDs is that they’ve learned to rely on precise observation, to
have confidence in math, to trust rational thought over intuition
wherever possible, and to value factual analysis over improvisation.
Google looks for these qualities because its co-founders put more
confidence in mathematics and rationality than in other qualities.
Finally, the experience of graduate-level research, which is generally
done solo, teaches these job candidates to operate autonomously.
Each graduate student has had to choose a thesis topic, which
familiarized them with what might be called controlled innovation.
A thesis topic, however original it might be, would have no chance
of being accepted if it didn’t fall within a certain scope.
So behind this oft-criticized elitism is a realistic motive: The
very best employees have a special psychological profile that benefits
high tech companies. What would be truly arrogant is the leaders
believing that because they are so brilliant themselves they don’t need
intelligent people around to help develop their company.
A Recruitment Factory
Hiring the best people is usually very expensive. Fortunately for
Google, the IT collapse that began in 2000 dumped thousands of
trained IT specialists, in all disciplines and at all levels, back into
the job market. In 2001, Motorola alone laid off one-quarter of
56 Chapter 4
its 150,000 employees. And the search engines weren’t doing any
better. In January 2001, then-leader AltaVista laid off 250 people,
one-fourth of its staff, and canceled its plans to go public. Yahoo!,
the other leader in the sector, also suffered large cutbacks. Sun
Microsystems, General Electric, and Siemens laid off thousands
more, and the list goes on.
Of course, most of those unemployed people didn’t go to work
for Google, but some of the best ones did. Google was hiring at
that time and could recruit from a large applicant pool. Because of
the economic situation, Google was able to hire excellent engineers
at low starting salaries, with partial compensation in stock options.
As we all know, the economy recovered, and Google’s recruitment
efforts continued to ramp up aggressively. Rather than settle for the
conventional recruiting methods used by most human resources
departments (résumé analysis, psychometric tests, and interviews),
Google chose a different path—yet again.
The company’s reputation, coupled with competitive salary
offers, would certainly have enabled it to recruit all the employees it
needed. Google’s management did something different: They built
a veritable recruitment machine, massive to the point of being far
disproportionate to the number of employees. In late 2005, Dr.
John Sullivan, a human resources expert, reported that 350 people
at Google were dedicated to recruitment. With 5,000 employees at
the time, this meant that 1 in 14 Google employees was working
in recruitment. That’s an extremely high ratio, considering that in
traditional companies the ratio is 1 recruitment employee per 100
employees. Cisco, another company that is extremely particular
about the quality of its new hires, had one recruiter for every 68
employees in 2005.3
Of course, these figures are not entirely comparable; not all
of Google’s in-house recruiters were working full time, and other
companies relied more on outside agencies for recruitment. Still, the
number of people involved in recruiting was huge, and this most
likely continues to be the case.
Recruiting the Best 57
The human resources department at Google is mostly made up
of temporary staffers. The Google recruitment machine is a factory,
but a flexible one whose workers are called in as the need arises.
This paradigm is something new in recruiting. In most companies,
the size of the recruitment staff remains pretty constant. Procedures
adjust to meet workload: Recruitment becomes more complex when
fewer open positions exist, and the process is simplified when more
openings are available. As a result, the quality of those hired tends
to decline as the number of openings (and perhaps the company’s
desperation) increases. Conversely, the fewer people the company
needs to recruit, the more interviews per candidate and the more
thorough the process.
Google’s recruitment figures show how much importance the
company places on a function that most organizations neglect or
deal with in a haphazard way. And for good reason: In a fast-growing
company that hires a lot of people, the quality of the workforce is
at stake and can very quickly deteriorate.
The mechanism is simple. Allow average employees to recruit
coworkers, and they will likely choose those who won’t outshine
them. This leads to a bureaucratic organization clogged with people
who lack the authority to make the slightest decisions without
seeking the approval of those above them. This phenomenon is an
all-too-common one that has even given rise to a proverb in Silicon
Valley, pointed out repeatedly by Ram Shriram,* one of Google’s first
investors and now a member of the board of directors: “Hire only
A people, and they’ll hire other A people. If you hire a B person,
they’ll hire C or D people.” Forgetting this rule leads to sloppiness
in very fast-growing companies. And Google has been particularly
fast growing: At the end of 2003, Google had 1,628 employees, a
number that grew to 10,674 by the end of 2006. That increase of
over 9,000 employees represents a more than five-fold increase in
only three years. And, as of June 2008, Google had 19,604 full-time
* Before starting his own venture capital firm, Shriram was one of the original team at Netscape, held
an executive position at Amazon.com, and founded several startup companies.
58 Chapter 4
employees—nearly double the number of employees that it had at the
end of 2006. As Peter Norvig, Director of Google Research, explains:
But how do you maintain the skill level while roughly
doubling in size each year? We rely on the Lake Wobegon
Strategy, which says only hire candidates who are above the
mean of your current employees. An alternative strategy (popular
in the dot-com boom period) is to justify a hire by saying
“this candidate is clearly better than at least one of our
current employees.” 4
Evaluating Technical Expertise
On the surface, Google’s recruitment process looks similar to those
of other companies. Like Microsoft and most large technology firms,
Google gives candidates a more or less traditional series of tests.
Those applying for a technical position take the Google Labs
Aptitude Test (GLAT), which is distinguished not only by its difficulty
(with some fairly complex statistical and mathematical questions)
but also by its originality and humor. For example, here’s a sample
question taken from an actual GLAT:
On your first day at Google, you discover that your cubicle
mate wrote the textbook you used as a primary resource in
your first year of graduate school. Do you:
A) Fawn obsequiously and ask if you can have an autograph.
B) Sit perfectly still and use only soft keystrokes to avoid
disturbing her concentration.
C) Leave her daily offerings of granola and English toffee
from the food bins.
D) Quote your favorite formula from the textbook and
explain how it’s now your mantra.
E) Show her how example 17b could have been solved
with 34 fewer lines of code.5
Once the tests are passed, interviews follow. Nothing about the
process is casual.
Recruiting the Best 59
Only in the details does the originality of this process become
apparent, however. The first difference is in its organization. At other
companies, recruiters generally use only a small number of tools:
specialized employment agencies, print ads, job fairs, contacts with
schools and professors, and headhunters whose main expertise is in
building networks of contacts.
Google uses those tools, too, but it also relies on its academic
culture and its experience in the field of research (both in terms of
database searching and research within a university environment).
Its Summer of Code, a program that offers student developers stipends
to write code for various open source projects, allows human
resources to identify candidates capable of resolving complex problems.
Google also sponsors contests that attract the most brilliant
minds in the field. And Google uses its own search tools to identify
people who are interested in its job openings.
Another hallmark of Google’s recruitment strategy is recruiter
specialization. The recruitment process is managed and organized
along particular roles. Some recruiters specialize only in first jobs,
others in technical people or managers, and still others speak only to
candidates for overseas employment. Even at the largest companies,
finding such specialization in the field of human resources would
be rare.
The result is that each recruiter sees only a very narrow sector
of candidates, so he or she can evaluate them closely to select those
who will be asked to take the psychometric tests and then, if they
pass the tests, be called in for interviews.
The most original part of recruitment at Google is the actual selection
process. During this process, Google brings in future coworkers
for multiple, lengthy interviews—as many as eight interviews per
potential new hire. (This information comes from candidates who
weren’t hired, because those who get jobs are bound by a lengthy
confidentiality agreement.)
By all accounts, the process is similar to university seminars where
a candidate is examined by peer experts who ask him or her technical
questions. They don’t ask about his or her personality or ability to get
along in a group; they want to know about the candidate’s capabilities.
The questions are technical, challenging, and very close to the
60 Chapter 4
topic at hand. The interview is a strict evaluation of the candidate’s
technical competence and his or her ability to comprehend, address,
and resolve the company’s technological challenges.
And when the peers asking the questions don’t have the knowhow
to evaluate the answers (as must happen often), they can at least
pose questions that will help form a clearer opinion. Greg Linden,
one of the creators of Amazon.com, explains it this way:
. . . exploring someone’s knowledge doesn’t necessarily
require knowledge of it yourself. You can just keep asking
questions, diving deeper and deeper. If they really understand
the problem, they should be able to explain it to
others, to teach people about the problem. Eventually, you
should get to a point where they say “I don’t know” to a
question. That’s a great sign. Knowing what you know isn’t
as important as knowing what you don’t know. It is a sign
of real understanding when someone can openly discuss
where their knowledge ends.6
During these discussions, the questions tackled are real ones
that arise within the company. One famous example is a question
from Amin Saberi’s interview; Saberi was a student in the final year
of the IT doctorate program at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
In one interview, Monika Henzinger, then Director of Research,
asked if he had any ideas about how to improve the ad rankings on
Google’s pages. The question was minor, but back at the university,
the young researcher mentioned it to his thesis advisor, who recommended
exploring it. After some study, they decided that it would
work better to include the daily budget of the advertiser within the
ranking algorithm. Saberi and his colleagues wrote the algorithm
and filed a patent.7
This sort of question is a long way from traditional evaluation
methods used in small firms, which often base their methods on
intuition and empathy.* But Google’s process is just as far from the
* Interviews of this sort can become pretty intense. A former Apple employee related how Steve Jobs
upset a candidate whom he found a bit uptight by asking if he was still a virgin. Needless to say, the
candidate concluded he wasn’t the right guy for the job. (Andy Hertzfeld, “Gobble, Gobble, Gobble,”
http://www.folklore.org/ )
Recruiting the Best 61
formal evaluations used by large companies, which attempt to evaluate
a prospective employee’s personality as well as his or her ability
to fit into the professional environment. At Google, a candidate
must convince his or her future peers that he or she can solve the
problems encountered in the everyday work environment. That is
all that counts.
If, on the surface, Google’s recruitment procedures resemble
those of other major companies, it becomes obvious, when looking
at the details, that their methods are actually the opposite of
traditional ones:
• Recruitment is considered a major function, which is rarely
the case.
• Human resource staffing is flexible so it can quickly be adapted
to meet current need.
• Degrees and academic qualifications are used to evaluate personal
qualities such as chosen career path, rigor in reasoning,
and autonomy. Normally, degrees are used only to evaluate
technical expertise.
• Interviews are used to examine technical qualifications: Candidates
are asked questions that apply to the work environment.
These ideas contribute to Google’s success. Can they be applied
anywhere? I’m not so sure. Google’s hiring process has one main
shortcoming: It is very, very long. So long that Google’s specialists
decided to limit the number of interviews candidates went through.
They also asked staff members who interview candidates to submit
their assessment within a week.8 And if Google’s process is too long
for Google, it’s definitely too long for companies that don’t have its
magnetic pull. In most cases, candidates won’t wait several months
before receiving an answer.

5
The 20 Percent Rule
Recruiting the best people is good; keeping them is a
lot better. This is why Google works so hard to offer
its employees more than just financial motivation.
Psychologists who study employee behavior
define two types of motivation: external, or extrinsic,
and internal, or intrinsic. Intrinsic motivation comes
from within the employee, from the employee’s
interest in a task, and the satisfaction that comes
from doing a job well. Extrinsic motivation comes
64 Chapter 5
from outside the employee, essentially from rewards such as bonuses,
raises, or changes in responsibilities.
Like other companies, Google uses external motivators. Many
Google employees are making plenty of money, as you can easily see
by counting the luxury cars in the parking lot. But Google also relies
heavily on intrinsic motivation, because the company recognizes that
its employees are motivated by more than money.
By doing so, Google follows well-known principles like those
expressed by Bill Gates early in his career: “No great programmer
is sitting there saying, ‘I’m going to make a bunch of money,’ or
‘I’m going to sell a hundred thousand copies.’ Because that kind of
thought gives you no guidance about the problems.”1
Google no doubt found it easy to see how well developers respond
to intrinsic motivation. As an example, Google could look to the
desire to produce quality software as evidenced by the open source
community, which depends on the cooperation and contributions of
thousands of talented programmers who donate their time to develop
and improve software. Their motivation comes largely from a desire
to produce quality software to be given away for free.
Still, Google had to adapt this type of intrinsic incentive to
a corporate environment. Google’s approach was to reinvent an
approach that the 3M company adopted in its research centers.
3M’s 15 percent rule encourages its researchers to devote 15 percent
of their time to projects of their own choosing, in other words to
“experimental doodling,” as 3M’s former Chairman of the Board
William McKnight called it. The 15 percent rule has been the source
of several highly profitable products, including Scotchgard Fabric &
Upholstery Protector, Scotch Masking Tape, and the highly profitable
Post-it Notes. Hewlett-Packard has a similar policy.
Google’s stated policy splits the work hours of its engineers and
developers into two parts: Eighty percent of their time is dedicated
to assigned projects, the official source of their paycheck, with the
remaining 20 percent dedicated to personal research of their own
choosing.
The 20 percent policy is a boon for employees who have never
had a moment to spare at previous jobs, and it’s also gratifying to
managers who can stop nagging employees about “soldiering on.”
The 20 Percent Rule 65
Although originally conceived by 3M to reduce turnover among
engineers who wanted to develop concepts they dreamed up at
work, this policy is one of the mainstays of the Google innovation
machine. When an employee envisions a new product, managers
don’t say, “It’s not a priority, so don’t waste your time on it.”
That is the exact answer Steve Wozniak, co-founder of Apple
Computer, got from Hewlett-Packard management when he proposed
developing a personal computer. Today, Google would presumably
tell him, “You can devote 20 percent of your time to it.”
Note Of course, although the engineers are free to choose which area
of research they want to pursue, Google assumes their research
will mainly be aligned with the company’s goals.
Functionally, the 20 percent strategy offers several advantages in
today’s business environment. The strategy makes Google attractive
to young college graduates (and potential hires) who want to preserve
some degree of the autonomy they enjoyed in academia as they
enter the corporate world. What better way for a company to make
a good first impression than by allowing recent graduates to allocate
20 percent of their time to the development of their own projects?
The 20 percent rule also attracts those who contribute to the open
source community; they see it as an opportunity to continue their
projects (and possibly “sell” them to Google). For example, consider
these thoughts from Mike Pinkerton, the principal developer of the
Macintosh web browser Camino. When Pinkerton began working
at Google, in September 2005, he wrote in his blog:
What oh what does it mean for Camino now that Pink is
going to work on Firefox? The answer: only good things.
Remember that Google employees get 20% of their time to
work on their own pet projects. While some of that time will
hopefully be spent nurturing the growing Mac community
within Google, a lot of that time will be directly spent on
Camino. That’s right, I’m (indirectly) getting paid to keep
working on it. That’s going to be a big help with the push
for 1.0 coming up this Fall.2
Google’s 20 percent policy (and 3M’s 15 percent policy before it)
also enhances productivity. Engineers are motivated to work faster in
66 Chapter 5
order to free up their personal creative time, while Google’s overall
culture of quality insures that 80 percent of work won’t be slipshod.
And connections between Google’s engineers and academic acquaintances
are encouraged because part of their time at Google can be
spent on work that may lead to publication in academic journals.
The 20 percent policy also leads to the emergence of new Google
products, especially ones that Google can integrate into its current
offerings. Google Suggest, AdSense for Content, and Orkut are
direct results of this 20 percent rule. What Google gives with one
hand, it recovers with the other.
The 20 percent rule makes perfect business sense and is consistent
with the logic of the potlatch, or reciprocity of gift giving,
as discussed in Chapter 2. This rule is also consistent with Nobel
Prize–winning economist George Akerlof ’s observations in a paper
that he published in 1984 titled “Gift Exchange and Efficiency
Wage Theory.”3
Akerlof was surprised to see certain companies paying employees
higher-than-market salaries. Based upon his research and analysis, he
concluded that the companies weren’t paying higher wages because
they were irrational or ignorant, but rather they were attempting
to reduce turnover (which is expensive) and increase productivity
and efficiency. They also knew that their employees would make
extra efforts to thank them for their generosity. Similarly, Google’s
assumption is that the 20 percent free time it gives its employees
will be returned to the company in information, innovation, and
increased loyalty.
Of course, this unusual HR policy requires new administrative
practices. In service businesses like consulting or engineering,
employees fill out timesheets with charges that detail how many hours
they spent on a given project. At Google, employees are asked to
report in about five sentences how they used their time the previous
week and to share their projects with coworkers for peer review. If
the employee’s peers find the project promising, it is adopted as an
official, company-financed project.
With personal projects subject to peer review, the quality bar is
again set high. Essentially, the resulting peer pressure and the value
The 20 Percent Rule 67
that employees place on their professional reputation ensures that
employees will take their personal projects quite seriously and that
priority will be given to ideas that are likely to interest the company
and be highly regarded.
The 20 percent rule also tends to weed out underperforming
employees and reinforce dedication to assigned work. Employees are
under a lot of internal pressure to demonstrate progress with their
personal projects, and employees that show little progress are seen
as perhaps not being up to the Google standard. In sum, Google’s
20 percent rule results in three indirect forms of leverage over its
engineers:
• I owe something to the company because I’m given the freedom
to invent and develop my own ideas.
• If I can’t free up 20 percent of my time, my performance is
below par.
• My reputation depends on developing ideas that will earn my
colleagues’ respect.
Judging by the comments of some former employees, the 20 percent
rule is extremely effective.
So is Google a worker’s paradise? Free meals, massages, swimming
pools, sports facilities, coworkers traveling between offices on
scooters or Segways. Many have described the generous benefits
available to employees at the Googleplex.
When journalists question the value of these perks, company
executives say something like, “Well, come around at 2 am and see
how many people are at the office.” No journalist has been curious
enough to verify that statement, so saying exactly how many people
are at their desk in the middle of the night is difficult, but the statement’s
implication doesn’t sound too farfetched. Hackers are known
for keeping irregular schedules and working for long stretches without
watching the clock. They produce best during prolonged periods of
uninterrupted work, as Joseph Weizenbaum writes in his Computer
Power and Human Reason: “The compulsive programmer spends all
the time he can working on one of his big projects.”4 He then goes
68 Chapter 5
so far as to compare hackers to the compulsive gamblers described
by Dostoyevsky:
for whom nothing exists but roulette . . . who scarcely notice
what goes on around them, being interested in nothing
else, who do nothing but play from morning ’til night, and
would probably continue all night nonstop if they could.5
The environment Google provides gives employees with unusual
work habits the means to regain their equilibrium after working
long hours. Although the environment is less about paradise than
about health and fitness, Google is paradise nonetheless for many
employees.
6
Coworkers Are the Best Judges
Articles written about Google mention its peer
review policy less frequently than its 20 percent rule,
but the peer review policy is at least as important
in filtering out the best projects for development
and feeding Google’s innovation pipeline.
As mentioned in Chapter 5, a team with a
prospective project that is an outgrowth of the
20 percent rule presents the project for coworkers
from other departments to review. In a traditional
70 Chapter 6
company, such a review would be the province of top executives, the
marketing department, or an executive committee. But at Google,
peer review takes place within a committee composed of coworkers.
Like an academic peer review group, this committee meets frequently
to decide whether to adopt new projects and to monitor those already
underway. The meetings are reportedly brief and intense:
Most Fridays at Google, the search-engine company in
Mountain View, California, Marissa Mayer and about 50
engineers and other employees sit down to do a search of
their own. Mayer, an intense, fast-talking product manager,
scribbles rapidly as the engineers race to explain and defend
the new ideas that they’ve posted to an internal Web site.
By the end of the hour-long meeting, six, seven, or sometimes
even eight new ideas are fleshed out enough to take to the
next level of development. Some of those ideas might become
new features on Google, new code or search algorithms, or
a new way to juice up the Google home page. “We really
jam in there,” Mayer says.1
This method is largely inspired by the peer review process used
for scientific journals. The editorial boards of scientific journals, typically
composed of a panel of recognized experts in the field, review
and critique the work that scientists submit to them for publication.
When the editorial board meets, these opinions (which may often be
quite harsh) are discussed and shared, and the board makes a collective
decision to publish or not. Similarly, Google employees submit
their work to their peers, high-level engineers whose opinions are
respected throughout the company because of their achievements
and expertise. Their opinion counts, and getting their approval is
important to everyone.
The Power of Reputation
Applied to the corporate world, this method focuses communication
directly and exclusively on the topic at hand, such as code or
programming. Better yet, the outcome depends not on seniority,
but on brainpower, qualifications, and fluency in the language of
technology. The judges are people who can read a page of code and
spot weaknesses.
Coworkers Are the Best Judges 71
These peer reviews contribute to the creation of a parallel hierarchy
based on a person’s reputation for technical expertise. Eric
Schmidt stressed the importance of this in an interview with Fast
Company magazine in 1999, when he was still head of Novell. In this
article, “How to Manage Geeks,” Schmidt describes the notion of a
“technical career ladder” that would put people on track to become
distinguished engineers:
If you don’t want to lose your geeks, you have to find a
way to give them promotions without turning them into
managers. Most of them are not going to make very good
executives—and, in fact, most of them would probably turn
out to be terrible managers. But you need to give them a
forward career path, you need to give them recognition,
and you need to give them more money.
Twenty years ago, we developed the notion of a dual career
ladder, with an executive career track on one side and a technical
career track on the other. Creating a technical ladder is
a big first step. But it’s also important to have other kinds of
incentives, such as awards, pools of stock, and non-financial
types of compensation. At Novell, we just added a new title:
distinguished engineer. To become a distinguished engineer,
you have to get elected by your peers. That requirement is
a much tougher standard than being chosen by a group of
executives. It’s also a standard that encourages tech people to
be good members of the tech community. It acts to reinforce
good behavior on everyone’s part.2
In this way, Google appeals to the hacker mindset—these are the
technology fanatics the company wants to recruit. The assumption
is that geeks are not rewarded by giving them managerial titles. Yes,
monetary rewards are important, but nonfinancial types of compensation
are at least as important. Peer review and respect count
for an awful lot.
This peer review approach harks back to the principle of competition
for honor, which was popular in the literature of the 18thcentury
Enlightenment; competition for honor was a central theme in
the analyses of merit by Helvétius, Diderot, and the Encyclopédistes.
They described merit as being derived from relationships of mutual
esteem rather than tokens of honor handed down from above: “True
72 Chapter 6
glory consists in the regard of people who are themselves worthy of
regard, and only this regard equates to merit,” wrote the author of
the article “Esteem” in Diderot’s Encyclopédie.* Or as Montesquieu
explained in Book III of his Spirit of Laws, “Honour sets all the parts
of the body politic in motion, and by its very action connects them;
thus each individual advances the public good, while he only thinks
of promoting his own interest.”3
This “competition for honor” provides an elegant solution to a
problem common to all companies that employ skilled specialists:
How do you increase organizational bureaucracy while simultaneously
providing opportunities for high-level engineers without shuttling
them into management positions that will only prevent them from
doing what they do best?
A Tool for Quality Control
Peer review is also a formidable force for ensuring quality. It supports
the most important principles of programming—standardized
development and quality control—because accepted projects must
meet accepted standards.
Repeated, detailed discussions among colleagues regarding company
programs encourage the natural development of a common
vernacular. Any urge toward nonstandard development will be nipped
in the bud, as nobody wants to risk having his or her project fail the
peer review test. Everyone knows that their peers are sure to reject
a project that doesn’t fit the vernacular.
This process solves one of the biggest problems software companies
face when they innovate: building a Tower of Babel, with
lines of products and modules that can’t communicate, which can
be expensive both in terms of actual cost and inflexibility. Future
development will be not only more costly but also limited by the fact
that knowledge remains locked in the memories of the developers
who created the code; in effect, development becomes proprietary.
* A group of 18th-century intellectuals led by Diderot collaborated to compile the first encyclopedia
of science. The project took 26 years to complete (1751–1777), with more than 140 authors writing
70,000 articles. Their Encyclopédie contained 26 volumes of text and 11 volumes of illustrative engravings.
Coworkers Are the Best Judges 73
As “owners” of the program, these programmers become indispensable.
No one else can upgrade or maintain the software. This creates
problems whenever management wants to reassign team members,
terminate employees, or simply negotiate salary increases.
Peer reviews also encourage thorough source code documentation.
Traditionally, programmers have resisted documenting their
code because the process is time consuming and it interrupts their
workflow. Instead, they put documenting aside until later, which
often means never.
Programmers subject to peer review, however, must show their
colleagues the algorithm or program modules they are writing.
They are required to document their code as they write it, with the
documentation itself becoming a means of quality control. Quality
is no longer the domain of inspectors, as is standard practice within
a traditional company. Instead the quality control is enacted by the
labor force itself, along the lines of the Toyota model.
Using peer reviews has other subtle benefits, too. For one, it
modifies management practices and the organizational hierarchy,
simplifying large projects by dividing them into smaller pieces. Peers
may be unwilling to examine a very long program because doing so
might require too great an investment of their time.
As in scientific publishing, where peer review is used to vet
articles before they are assembled into books, Google’s peer reviewers
have less work to do when projects are subdivided. (This mode of
evaluation also enables Google to track development more closely
and to cancel a project sooner if it isn’t viable.)
Obviously, this model has serious advantages in terms of improved
quality, exchanges among engineers, and product management.
But the model is not perfect. Two key areas are vulnerable. First, a
considerable amount of time and energy must be expended. Second,
the model has a political aspect. Unlike the peer review system used
in the academic world, Google’s is not anonymous. The reviewers,
referees, and experts in charge of evaluating projects all know one
another and often work together.
The political aspect leads to intrigue. When participants are not
invited to peer review meetings, the rumor mill buzzes with talk of
future pink slips.
74 Chapter 6
But then again, every company has its unique corporate culture,
and each has its particular quirks and oddities. Like any company,
Google is not immune to these potential problems and corporate
intrigues. Although the company trades in data and information,
Google is full of people, and where there are people, there is politics.
7
An Innovation Machine
If asked to describe Google in a few words, you
might call it “an innovation machine.” Hardly a
month goes by, often not even a week, without an
announcement from Google regarding some sort
of new release.
Anyone in the tech industry knows that innovation
is essential, and the fact that Google innovates
is certainly nothing new. But what Google
understands better than other companies is that
76 Chapter 7
innovation for the sake of innovation isn’t enough to protect a company
from increasing competition.
As you’ll recall from Chapter 1, software receives weak intellectual
property protection, and California’s liberal legal climate
disallows noncompete clauses in employment contracts. New ideas
don’t remain new for long before they face direct competition.
In fact, the time between the release of a new product and the
appearance of direct competition has shrunken dramatically over
the years. In 2001, economists Rajshree Agarwal and Michael Gort
calculated the interval between the appearance of a new product
and the arrival in the market of a directly competing product over a
100‑year period from 1886 to 1986. Their result is telling: As shown
in the figure below, these intervals have shortened continually—to the
point of nearly disappearing—from about 25 years at the beginning
of the 20th century to less than five years between 1947 and 1986.1
Whereas the time between the release of new products and the
appearance of direct competition has decreased dramatically, the
cost of innovation, including research and development (R&D),
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1887–
1906
1907–
1926
1947–
1966
1967–
1986
1927–
1946
Period of time
Number of years until a competing product appears
Time until appearance of competing products
An Innovation Machine 77
has only increased. In fact, in the 30 years between 1958 and 1988,
these costs increased sevenfold in the United States.
The moral of this story is that today no company can rely on a
single technological breakthrough to ensure its future.
In the past, companies like Kodak, Xerox, and Polaroid could
preserve their market dominance for decades with patents. Now,
companies that want to beat the competition and build a dominant
position must find other methods.
But how? One response to the challenge is to increase the pace
of new product releases to stay ahead of the competition. Judging
by its constant flow of new products and features, Google seems to
have decided to go this route. Its leaders must have deduced early
on that stopping with the first version of their search engine would
be suicidal, even if the engine was considered infinitely better than
its competitors. Their algorithm was likely to encounter competition
unless it evolved quickly, and without a doubt, that competition is
right around the corner. According to Marissa Mayer, Vice President
of Search Products and User Experience at Google, “We were constantly
searching for new ideas.”2
Ideas are quickly transformed into products because Google is
not restrained by traditional R&D procedures. The company keeps
listening, always and everywhere, because it knows that breakthrough
ideas can come from anyone—engineers, academics, even competitors.
And when it comes to good ideas, Google knows that no one
is superior, and no one person has an edge, not even the company’s
leaders.
Don’t Formalize Research
Individual geniuses toiling in solitude are not the source of most
inventions—large corporations are. And as anyone who has worked
at a large corporation knows, that progress actually comes about
through the bureaucratic process.
Most corporations give birth to new projects only after following
a regulated, formal, and complex set of routines. Now, I’m oversimplifying
a bit, but basically the process works like this: Researchers
devote countless hours to drafting documents for committees to
examine at great length before making even the smallest decisions.
78 Chapter 7
These committees project the rate of return on investment (often
based on pure conjecture), and if the proposed project passes this
first stage, the researchers work with the marketing department to
determine the product’s specifications. Proposals that do not fit neatly
within the company’s strategic mandates are abandoned, with the
rest bounced back to researchers with requests for more details and
further explanation. That’s the routine.
Of course, this method has its advantages. Its advocates defend
it with good cause, saying it reduces the risk of developing new
products and prevents the development of products the company
couldn’t market anyway.
Anyone familiar with the history of technology has heard about
the mishaps at the Xerox PARC research facility in Palo Alto. This
famous think tank developed several important new technologies,
including Ethernet and the graphical user interface that inspired the
Apple Macintosh. But how could a photocopier company have manufactured
and marketed leading-edge computer products? The end
result was that the inventions of Xerox’s engineers either remained in
their filing cabinet or were plundered by competitors better equipped
to market them.
If the slow product release track has its advantages, it also has
major defects: It consumes vast amounts of time and money, and it
faces major stumbling blocks from the bureaucracy itself. Management
is wary of taking risks. Operations people hate to eliminate
products they already manufacture and distribute because they don’t
want to discard their investment in manufacturing, advertising, and
sales training. The legal department worries about liability. Although
none of these precautions is illogical, cumulatively they increase
costs, raise break-even points, and limit innovation.
How does Google do it differently? Its founders have chosen
to simplify the product development process. For one thing, many
decisions are made in the peer reviews described in Chapter 6, thus
dramatically reducing paperwork.
Two criteria are emphasized over any others (including compliance
with the business plan): technical feasibility and user interest.
Projects need not be part of a three- or five-year program in order
An Innovation Machine 79
to be pursued. If they’re feasible and meet users’ needs, they have a
good shot of succeeding. This approach has a reverse effect: Product
introductions don’t follow any apparent logic, which can give the
impression that the company is going off in every direction, chasing
several rabbits at once. But it prevents ideas from being neglected—
ideas whose only defect is that they don’t fit within a predetermined
framework. Those that are retained can go into development at once.
The a priori operational control exerted by management is absent for
projects developed during the 20 percent personal-time allotment.
The benefits are immediate in terms of both time expended and time
to market. Engineers aren’t forced to spend additional development
time, and they save the time needed to generate paperwork arguments
that others would spend yet more time demolishing.
Innovation Is Everybody’s Business
Routines are a natural outgrowth of specialized research. When
product development is entrusted to specialists, management wants
to be able to control them. The only way to do this is to establish
procedures. By making innovation everybody’s business, Google
reduced this tendency in the simplest way possible, according to
Marissa Mayer. In practice, this means Google’s culture values original
ideas from any employee, and any engineer can quickly develop
a major product advance during his or her 20 percent free time.
Examples of these successes include Google News, which was the
idea of Krishna Bharat, an Indian engineer who was fascinated that
his grandfather tuned in to the BBC every day to compare British
commentary with what he read in the Indian press. The same goes
for Orkut, Google’s social networking community, as well as the
Google Toolbar that keeps track of recent searches on Google.
The famous Japanese quality circles of the 1970s confirmed
the ability of individual employees to contribute to improvements
in production methods. But even before quality circles received so
much attention, many industrial companies solicited suggestions for
improvements from employees. Some gave awards for the soundest,
most original, or most profitable proposals.
80 Chapter 7
To trace the genealogy of this concept, you have to go back to
Adam Smith and his account in The Wealth of Nations of the invention
of one of the most significant improvements to the steam engine:
In the first fire [steam] engines, a boy was constantly employed
to open and shut the valves as the piston ascended
or descended. One of those boys observed that, by tying a
string from the handle of the valve to another part of the
machine, the valve would open and shut without assistance,
and leave him to divert himself with his play-fellows. One
of the greatest improvements was thus the discovery of a
boy who wanted to save his own labour. . . .3
This concept may be simple and obvious, but its implementation
is limited. The toolboxes used in quality circles are mostly empty;
quality circles only refine the details. Google’s leaders figured out
what many others missed, so they created an environment favorable
to innovation, and they installed tools to help new ideas emerge. In
startup companies, the original core staff members are typically the
ones most closely involved in product development. The founders
generally have a yearning for innovation and new ideas, or they
would be working someplace else. They also share a direct bond with
the company’s leaders, which makes communicating new ideas and
seeking their endorsement easy. But as companies grow and become
more bureaucratic, things change. They become more risk averse,
relationships are politicized, and ideas often disappear in the management
layers as a result. Google has managed to avoid the bureaucratic
trap only because of the subtle—and no doubt fragile—concept for
innovation developed by its leaders. The formula looks like this:
Recruit only the brightest, most qualified engineers from
top universities. Management can more easily accept ideas
from highly educated developers than from employees with no
academic qualifications.
Encourage the collaboration of Internet enthusiasts. Their
opinions and ideas can only be useful.
Build networks of Silicon Valley contacts. Stay connected.
Listen to find out what competing companies and startups are
working on.
An Innovation Machine 81
Encourage everyone to seek a place in the web inventor hall
of fame. As respected tech essayist Paul Graham wrote, “What
matters in Silicon Valley is how much effect you have on the
world. The reason people there care about Larry and Sergey is
not their wealth but the fact that they control Google, which
affects practically everyone.”4
Facilitate the rapid circulation of ideas throughout the company.
Google supports communication among teams working
on different projects with networking tools. These include the
intranet, blogs, and even the office design itself. A grand Brazilian
hardwood staircase in the main lobby is fitted with electrical outlets
so employees can sit on the steps and share their work with
others. Did the architect come up with this idea? No. Larry Page
was personally involved in the office design and construction.
He knew how much the working environment could support
the exchange of ideas and experience that are behind so many
innovations.
Look for Ideas Where They Are
You’ve seen how Google motivates its engineers to seek new ideas and
share them. But its leaders haven’t stopped there. They’ve also built
a company able to look for ideas wherever they may be—whether
at a university, among the users of the programs it freely provides
to developers, or in other companies.
Consider Amin Saberi, who was in his last year at the Georgia
Institute of Technology when he was involved in developing the keyword
auction algorithm discussed in Chapter 4. The problem posed
during an interview reminded him, a fellow student, and his thesis
advisor (a Berkeley alumnus) of a more general pairing problem that
had been solved 15 years earlier. They applied their knowledge to the
algorithm, and a few weeks later presented the result at a Stanford
conference attended by Google employees, who subsequently invited
them to present their algorithm at the Googleplex.
Collaborating with universities comes naturally for a company
with many young recent graduates. Many of Google’s employees
maintain close links to their alma maters and connections with
82 Chapter 7
friends at other creative companies. These connections help to keep
Google in touch with new developments elsewhere.
For example, Google’s desktop search resulted from a conversation
between friends in which one mentioned an Australian engineer who
had created a search engine to find local files on his Linux computer.
This tip drove the development of Google Desktop and gave Google
a two-month lead on Microsoft’s similar tool. Remember, when the
interval between a new product release and the launch of a competing
product is shrinking, time is of the essence.
More ideas come from the programmers that Google regularly
solicits through contests like the code competition held every summer
since 2002.* The first prize includes $10,000 cash, an all-expense-paid
VIP visit to the Googleplex in Mountain View, and a potential trial
run of the code on Google’s multibillion-document repository. In
2006, Google received more than 3,000 applications; of those, 630
were from students at 456 universities. Students from 90 different
countries were represented in the competition.
The first winner of the programming contest, Daniel Egnor,
entered a search application that would display only local results.
For example, if you were looking for a mechanic in San Francisco,
the search engine would display only pages of San Francisco–based
mechanics. This was the origin of Google Local, a service that now
competes with the local Yellow Pages and other local search services
in the United States.
Google also knows that its users have great ideas, too. One
example is the Professor-Verifier, a program developed by an academic
using one of the application programming interfaces (APIs)
that Google gives away to its customers. The application makes it
easy to check academic credentials: Enter a name in the search box,
and the program automatically queries all university sites. If the
name appears on one of the sites, the tool confirms that the person
is who he or she says. If the name doesn’t appear, maybe the person
isn’t who he or she says. From here, you can easily see how Google
could build an extension to this application that would, for example,
check the academic qualifications of employment candidates.
* Contest information is available at http://www.google.com/programming-contest/winner.html.
An Innovation Machine 83
Acquire
Finally, Google excels at buying ideas (see the table below). Unlike
many other industry players (especially Apple, which is known for
developing its products exclusively in-house), Google is known for
buying companies with interesting products. Since 2001, the search
giant has acquired over 50 companies. Most of them are startups
created by small teams, often as few as two or three people, with an
idea and the ability to develop it. Typically, acquisition targets have
been companies that have developed a new web application that has
attracted a few thousand or tens of thousands of visitors.
Google Acquisitions from 2001 through 2008
Year Number of
Acquisitions
Fields
2001 2 Data mining, search engine
2003 6 Search engine, online advertising, blogging
2004 6 Traffic and map analysis, image organizer, HTML
editor, search engine
2005 10 Broadband Internet access, graphic software,
search engines, mobile and graphic software, office
automation software
2006 11 Advertising, blogging software, video sharing
(YouTube), computer vision, office automation
software
2007 16 Office automation software, advertising, statistical
software, advertising, photography, social
networking
2008 3 Online advertising, online video, weblog software
Sources: The Net Journal (August 24, 2005 ), CNET, and Wikipedia
This type of growth is external, but not the same kind of external
growth produced by acquiring other Internet players. In the
late 1990s, when Yahoo! acquired several competing search engines
(including AltaVista and Overture), its objective was to consolidate
the field. This same traditional policy of consolidation led Oracle to
acquire PeopleSoft, the human resources software company. Google,
however, acquires for innovation, not consolidation. Rather than
reinvent what already exists, Google shops and buys appropriate
84 Chapter 7
tools when it can. This strategy sidesteps the “not invented here”
syndrome that has been so costly for many companies stuck in the
paradigm of copying what others have invented.
Google acquires more than market share, expertise, or even
technology when it acquires a company. After all, Google already has
the means and the engineers to emulate or reinvent these products;
instead, it “buys” the users and sometimes the founders.
Consider Google’s acquisition of PyraLabs in 2003. The company
was a pioneer in the field of blogs. Google could easily have
developed its own blogging software (the resources and technology
would certainly have been easy for them to replicate), but Google
lacked the user base. Purchasing PyraLabs gave Google not only a
blogging tool but also dedicated users.
YouTube is another example. Google had already developed its
own video upload service when it spent $1.65 billion to acquire the
fledgling company in October 2006. But YouTube had been first to
market and already had a committed, massive, and growing user base.
In both cases, Google needed an important asset that it couldn’t
necessarily produce on its own: subscribers and information on the
behavior of those subscribers. The search engine looks for what
Internet users want without going through the process of market
research. Of course, you may wonder why these mostly young
companies agree to be bought. Cash is one reason, but not the only
one. By acquiring these companies, Google gives their leaders an
opportunity that no venture capital firm could offer: They gain access
to Google’s platform, its statistical capability, and its expertise—plus
its aura of chutzpah.
Release Early and Often (or, How to Involve Users in the
Development Process)
The last component of the Google innovation machine is its early
release of new products. Instead of waiting until its products are
refined, Google releases them as beta versions. To avoid making
waves among more cautious users, Google says little or nothing about
upgrades to its tools; they typically just appear ready to be discovered.
Bloggers are the main communication source about new tools.
An Innovation Machine 85
This silence enables the company to divide its users into two
main segments: early adopters and mainstream users. Early adopters
include the adventurous pioneers, who are usually the best qualified,
most interested, and most interesting to the company. Early adopters
tend to be tolerant of product flaws because they understand that a
beta product is likely to have bugs. They try the upgrade, evaluate
it, and help improve it. Mainstream users, on the other hand, tend
to be more cautious users who need some time to become familiar
with upgrades.
This strategy makes it possible to multiply new releases without
generating many complaints. Google can identify defects and make
quiet improvements. For instance, only the initial users of Google
Books learned in February 2006 that the software for displaying
book pages contained a bug. By the time most people discovered
the service, the bug had been fixed.
Google’s release strategy brings the concept of bootstrapping to the
business world. Bootstrapping is a concept developed by researchers
at the Augmentation Research Center,* a Stanford University
laboratory. The expression derives from stories told about the (real)
Baron von Münchhausen, who (the stories go) pulled himself out
of a swamp by tugging on his bootstraps.
Google bootstraps its early products by sharing them with
researchers, requesting feedback, and using that feedback to enhance
features. By doing so, it augments its narrow development team by
inviting more adventurous users, either self-selected or recruited by
friends and relatives within the community, to join its Trusted Tester
Program, a little-known program that acts as a sort of private club for
friends of Google employees. This program allows invited individuals
to test confidential Google products during early development stages.
This early release and testing strategy not only shortens development
time, but also delegates to privileged user “volunteers” the
responsibility of product testing—evaluating performance, identifying
flaws, and suggesting improvements.
* This laboratory was founded by Douglas Engelbart, one of the fathers of the Internet. He invented
the mouse, a standard feature of all personal computers today. He was also the first to use a cathode
ray tube to display text and graphs, which makes him the inventor of the monitor.
86 Chapter 7
Obviously, the approach incorporates one of the founding
principles of the open source movement. In fact, Google uses the
“release early, release often” policy pioneered by that community,
specifically by Linus Torvalds, the creator of Linux.
Involving users in the product development process is not without
its risks. The trade press and bloggers are sometimes scornful,
or at least skeptical, of these beta products. For example, influential
blogger Dave Pell’s comment in January 2006 about the Google
video service, “Hey, is it my imagination, or is [this] the first really
bad product Google has launched?” caused quite a buzz. His criticism
was picked up by CNET and reverberated across the Internet.
But, in the end, negative critiques like this one don’t really matter.
These reactions ultimately serve to provide Google with useful
information on how to improve their product offerings. Users judge
the performance of its products over the long term and overlook
occasional mistakes; they also tend to become more tolerant as the
fixes appear.
The fact that users don’t pay for most Google services undoubtedly
influences their behavior. They are encouraged to try applications
they otherwise wouldn’t buy and to participate and reciprocate
with comments or advice, whether negative or constructive. Most
users don’t even notice new releases until weeks after they’ve been
launched (and improved, if need be). This limits the impact of a
potential error. Beyond these advantages, the early release policy
allows Google to circumvent the bureaucracy of traditional industrial
research methodology and profit from its investments in R&D.
By bringing products to market rapidly, whether they’re ready
or not, Google derives maximum benefit from its efforts and shortcircuits
potential competition. After all, profitability doesn’t come
from innovation alone. Google’s strategy of releasing early and often
is also a brilliant and inventive marketing strategy: It dissuades
potential competitors, raises the cost of entry to the market, and
keeps users in Google’s sphere of influence.
An Innovation Machine That Pays Off
In fact, contrary to popular belief, innovation isn’t synonymous with
profitability. Numerous researchers have demonstrated that the most
An Innovation Machine 87
innovative companies aren’t necessarily the most profitable. Peter
Drucker, the celebrated management guru, expounded on this at
length in a 1996 interview: “The computer industry hasn’t made a
dime. . . . Intel and Microsoft make money, but look at all the people
who are losing money all the world over. It is doubtful the industry
has yet broken even.”5 Several studies since then have confirmed
Drucker’s pessimistic view that the most innovative business sectors
are not inevitably those earning the most.*
Two phenomena explain this paradox. One is competition, which
initially causes competitors to copy innovations very quickly. I’ve
already discussed the diminishing window of time available for a
company to profit from a new technology’s competitive advantage. If
a company wants to recoup its investment in R&D, it needs to take
full advantage of this competitive edge during the first few months of
a product’s release. Traditionally, this means making massive marketing
investments, creating a brand, and preparing a sales network for
the rollout. All these propositions are very expensive. But Google’s
rollout strategy eliminates these traditional necessities: They get
users to play with beta products and then test and promote them.
The second phenomena is the “diversion” of most benefits
ultimately derived from a new product, sometimes called the ripple
effect. Economists who study these issues have demonstrated that
more than 80 percent of benefits go to parties other than the inventors.
6 To cite only one historical example, the public at large and
other companies realized infinitely more benefits from the invention
of electrical power and its distribution than the companies
directly involved in its production. This is simply because entire
new industries were developed to exploit the advantages afforded by
electricity—household appliances and every other kind of electrical
device. Nobody would complain about that, except perhaps those
who originally invested in the invention of the processes to generate
and distribute electricity.
* See, for example, Sarv Devaraj and Rajiv Kohli, The IT Payoff: Measuring the Business Value of
Information Technology Investments (New York: Prentice Hall, 2002).
88 Chapter 7
Google, however, has devised a mechanism that captures more
of the benefits from its new products. It has two elements:
The sale of advertising on both its search engine and the sites
visited through AdWords links (which contain more AdSense
links) This allows Google to profit not only from its own inhouse
R&D but also from the efforts of all the companies that
specialize in traffic optimization, companies whose sole task is
to help site owners attract more visitors.
The assistance of other innovators When Google has acquired
companies (a frequent occurrence), they haven’t buried their
technology or done it simply to make up for lost time but to
bring the company’s platform, their technology, reputation,
and users into a larger service environment that the acquired
company’s engineers didn’t develop.
Google is first to benefit from a rise in traffic that would otherwise
divert profits elsewhere.
Just as a magnet attracts iron filings, Google attracts creative
people and new ideas that, in another context, would be developed
and deployed far from its search engine. Thus, it prevents many of
the benefits of its own innovations from being diverted. By attracting
innovation in this way, Google has been able to insulate itself from
competition, speed up its development rate, and, day by day, make
it a little more expensive for new competitors to stay in the race.
8
Like a Swiss Army Knife
I think Google should be like a Swiss Army knife: clean,
simple, the tool you want to take everywhere. When you
need a certain tool, you can pull these lovely doodads out
of it and get what you want. So on Google, rather than
showing you upfront that we can do all these things, we
give you tips to encourage you to do things these ways. We
get you to put your query in the search field, rather than
have all these links up front. That’s worked well for us. Like
when you see a knife with all 681 functions opened up,
you’re terrified. That’s how other sites are—you’re scared to
use them. Google has that same level of complexity, but we
have a simple and functional interface on it, like the Swiss
Army knife closed.1
—Marissa Mayer, former Google Product Manager (now
Vice President, Search Products and User Experience) in a
2002 interview
90 Chapter 8
Marissa Mayer’s quote, comparing Google to a Swiss Army
knife, perfectly describes one of the main driving forces of Google’s
success: the company’s ability to introduce new offerings continually
without messing up its existing ones. Now, let’s see why this
capacity is so important.
Earlier Product Strategies
Before we dig deeper into Google’s strategy for product development,
let’s take a step back to Henry Ford’s development of the standardized
Model T automobile. Built on an assembly line and sold at relatively
low prices to many people who had never owned a car, the Model T
created a mass market for automobiles. But, at the same time, the
car eliminated the expression of individuality and the exclusivity
that had previously characterized the automobile purchase. The
Model T was so standardized that your Model T looked just like
the one parked down the street or around the corner.
As the automobile industry developed, options and accessories
were offered to consumers to make their mass-produced car more
unique. Manufacturers offered vehicles that could be customized
with different paint colors, interior fittings, power trains, stereos,
and so on, all according to the individual’s preference.
This à la carte approach to product differentiation has been
applied by product managers (like Marissa Mayer) to fields ranging
from household appliances to hot dogs to hamburger toppings.
Consumers in Western nations and in many Westernized nations
are used to personalizing their purchases and have come to expect it.
But, on the other side, customization introduces logistical complications,
burdens sales outlets, and increases the number of products
rejected by consumers as either not being unique enough or being
unique in the wrong way. This, in turn, increases product sales and
development costs.
Consider Microsoft
Microsoft is a good example of the next phase of product development.
Taking into account the ongoing decline in prices (according
Like a Swiss Army Knife 91
to the famous Moore’s Law*), Bill Gates offered a range of products
that would do whatever you wanted as long as you had a keyboard.
Microsoft Office is often called bloatware; Office is the Model T of
the workplace but fully loaded with accessories you didn’t order. It
contains not only word processing and spreadsheet applications but
also many functions that nobody will ever fully utilize. Those functions
are there (somewhere) if you can find them, but most people
don’t even know they exist.
Microsoft has caught plenty of flak from its critics for its approach
to product development. Why include so many arcane features that
only clog up menus, hog memory, and baffle new users? When competing
software had fewer features, however, why would a consumer
not opt for the product with so many extras for about the same price?
Because more features make a product seem better. Microsoft’s development
of bloatware has actually given it a competitive advantage.
This strategy worked beautifully for Microsoft, initially contributing
to its near-monopoly on office productivity software. But the
addition of so many new features, and the increasing complexity of
that software, has brought disadvantages, too. Every time Microsoft
wants to upgrade its software, its engineers, in order to maintain
“backward compatibility,” have to make sure their enhancements
are compatible with earlier releases and that everything still works,
including the 200 new features they’ve just added. The richer the
product is in features, the greater chance of incompatibility with
earlier versions or of new bugs being introduced. And the issues
become more complex and harder to control with each new version.
Microsoft has marketed itself into quite a bind. Rather than risk
customer dissatisfaction by offering fewer features with each release
or, more dramatically, simplifying their bloatware, the company is
forced to increase the length of test periods and delay the release
of new products, which is probably why its Office suite releases are
predictably behind schedule.
* Gordon Moore, one of the founders of Intel, stated that the density of semiconductors doubled
every 18 months, thus driving down technology prices proportionately.
92 Chapter 8
The Google Swiss Army Knife
Google’s Swiss Army knife approach to product development solves
many of the problems that plague other product strategies. For
one thing, every Google tool (or application) can be used autonomously—
separate from other Google applications. If you really like
Google Maps, for example, but you don’t like Google Documents,
you can just use Google Maps. That’s not to say you can’t use one
Google tool with another, but the idea so far has been that you don’t
need to use tools together.
Unlike Microsoft’s Office suite, Google tools go through separate
development cycles and are released incrementally as features are
ready. The release of a new version of Gmail, for example, doesn’t
replace the Gmail that you’re already using, it enriches it. Also, if
Google wants to modify one tool, that modification won’t necessarily
affect its other tools. A customer who has spent time learning
a Google product doesn’t lose any of his or her investment; the
application simply changes incrementally.
When comparing Google’s product development and release
with that of Microsoft’s, you can see a clear paradigm shift. Much
of Google’s success is a byproduct of the fact that most of Google’s
applications are delivered in real time, whether through a web browser
or a telephone. You can’t buy Google’s applications in big box stores;
you simply point your web browser to them and they’re ready to be
used. Or you can download and use them.
In contrast, the bulk of Microsoft’s product line is sold through
retail channels or preinstalled by computer manufacturers. As the
major player in the traditional software market, each new version
of Microsoft software requires a significant investment. Because
Microsoft’s investment is so great and the push behind each new
product release so massive, Microsoft manages this expense by
increasing the intervals between releases, adding new features in
an attempt to justify the upgrade cost, and potentially frustrating
customers who are inclined to resist having to learn something so
dramatically new.
Google, on the other hand, has a much easier time with product
development than a traditional software publisher. Changes to
Google’s software are typically discrete enhancements to applications
Like a Swiss Army Knife 93
with a relatively small feature set. These limited tools are inherently
easier and cheaper to develop, test, and maintain than bloatware like
Microsoft Office. The reduced complexity of Google’s applications
also reduces maintenance costs, which typically average 40 percent
of an application’s cost application during its lifecycle. (These costs
include fixing bugs, preparing new versions, and user testing—costs
that affect the life of a product between major releases.)
Google’s application development has another interesting aspect.
While most buyers of traditional, packaged software will complain
loudly if a company like Microsoft tries to sell them beta software,
Google doesn’t hesitate to release beta applications and label them
as such. Most users continue using applications like Gmail, which,
even as I write this in the spring of 2009, are still listed as beta.
That beta label allows Google to get away with a lot by lowering
user expectations while at the same time delivering more than users
might expect—for free.
Finally, Google’s Swiss Army knife approach to tool development
allows it to reinvent relationships with its users, who can choose the
tools they want to use. Google doesn’t impose anything on anybody;
it’s all about customization and individuality. Users design their own
search portal with iGoogle, create their own maps with My Maps,
customize the news stories displayed on Google News, and so on.
Google is software your way; though, of course, within Google’s
parameters.
Is Google Lacking Direction?
Google’s modular approach to tool development is sometimes misunderstood.
The multiplicity of new tools often gives the impression
that the company is lacking clear direction, that its leaders have no
clear strategy. In fact, Google’s roster of offerings has evolved along
two parallel tracks: search tools and productivity tools. The tracks
are complementary and share the common goal of making Google
your Internet operating system.
Google makes no secret of wanting to remain the king of search.
In its effort to do so, it continually releases applications offering
personalized search tools as well as search tools designed to meet specific
needs, such as sales (Shopping), information (News), academic
94 Chapter 8
research (Scholar), films and music (Video and Music), literary (Book
Search), local information (Local), and so on.
Google’s other significant track, which isn’t as apparent, is represented
by its efforts to release productivity tools that take aim squarely
at Microsoft Office, the dominant Windows operating system, and
user desktops in general. Google wants to own search, and it also
wants to own your desktop by making Google the foundation of an
Internet workstation, whether through offering tools to enable communication
(Gmail, Groups, Orkut, Blogger, and so on), document
production and distribution, or office collaboration (Calendar and
Desktop Search)—tools designed so you can interact with everything
on your computer via Google. And the list goes on and on.
The Online Swiss Army Knife: An Internet Operating
System
The Swiss Army knife is a good metaphor for the way Google develops
and deploys its products. It also aptly describes the growing collection
of free tools the company makes available that help users with office
productivity (Documents), keeping track of meetings and appointments
(Calendar), instant messaging (Gmail), image and blogging
software and hosting (Blogger), news with automatic alerts (News),
and translation (Translate). And more is always on the way, of course.
Taken as a whole, you can see how Google is trying to develop
an Internet operating system—one that runs through a web browser
on any platform.
No matter the Google application, they all share the same style
and feel whether they’re running on Windows, Mac OS, Linux, or a
cell phone. Because most Google tools run in a web browser, they are
cross-platform, cross-browser applications. You can use most Google
applications on any computer and on many mobile devices including
phones, in just about any configuration and with few limitations.
Most Google applications offer a collaborative component, too,
that allows more than one person to share the same document, map,
video, and so on. Google encourages this collaboration (and builds its
user base) by encouraging users to invite other people to try tools like
Gmail (initially by invitation only) or to share a common calendar.
Like a Swiss Army Knife 95
Ultimately, web applications release users from the constraints of
fixed workstations, disks, and USB keys, allowing them to become
truly mobile and social. Any Internet café will do.
You can easily imagine a whole new family of web-based applications
just over the horizon. Many will certainly come from Google’s
development teams, but many more will come from other developers
and users. Take Google Maps, for example. As of this writing,
users have invented several new applications based on Google Maps,
including ones that track gas prices, earthquakes, eBay listings, and
YouTube postings. The list is endless. Microsoft has followed a similar
model with its operating systems by working with developers to
create DOS or certified Windows-based applications and by licensing
its OS to almost anyone who would pay. Google, of course, is
not seeking payment for its tools, but the effect is similar: Google’s
growing dominance in search and the further development of what
you might call an Internet operating system.
What has made Microsoft so successful could make Google
equally successful by reinforcing its dominant position in the search
engine market. You can imagine Google becoming the equivalent of
an operating system that serves as the basis for an environment or
ecosystem of applications designed to help make better use of the
huge mass of information available.
Google’s Swiss Army knife could become to the Internet what
the operating system is to the PC: a cornerstone impossible to circumvent,
which, in turn, would make the company that controls it
the king of the Internet.

9
For the Love of Math and Measurement
We’re very analytical. We measure everything, and we systematized
every aspect of what’s happening in the company.
For example, we introduced a spreadsheet product this week.
I’ve already received my hourly updates on the number of
people who came in to apply to use the spreadsheet, the
number of people who are actually using it, the size of the
spreadsheets.1
—Eric Schmidt
Everyone who meets Sergey Brin notices his aptitude
as a mathematician. He has confidence in figures.
Math is everywhere at Google: in pricing policy,
in discussions among engineers, in decisions about
98 Chapter 9
whether to develop a new product, in the development of those
products, in recruiting, and in evaluating employee performance.
Google measures and analyzes everything.
This complicity between mathematics and management is nothing
new. At the beginning of the industrial revolution, the mathematician
Baron de Prony spent years compiling logarithmic tables
that filled 19 folio volumes.2 His work inspired the French and
British theories of management and, during the 19th century, led
to employees without mathematical training using the abacus so
they would be able to calculate prices.
The theory of rational pricing, introduced by Jules Dupuit and
Clément Colson, was further developed in the 1950s by economists
and mathematicians like Maurice Allais, who applied it to the pricing
of electricity. These methods all attempted to “achieve the maximum
return on goods”* by defining a correct price, meaning a price that
corresponded to the usefulness the purchaser received. Later, in the
1960s, engineers working on operational research applied mathematical
calculation to problems that were considered too complex
to manage, such as delivery and production schedules.
The methods Google uses to charge for Internet advertising fit
precisely within this tradition. But as good engineers, the leaders of
Google didn’t stop there. They put computing power at the daily
service of management in a number of ways.
The abundance of numerical data available at Google impresses
every newcomer. Moma, the house intranet, can reportedly be used
to track a multitude of numerical indicators and statistics. Employees
can track clicks on AdWords and traffic statistics, the most frequently
used search terms, the number of simultaneous searches, and much
more. (Moma even includes information on the status of products
in development and the number of employees on staff at any given
time.) Once the data has been collected, users can employ one of the
many statistical tools available to analyze the data they’ve collected.
* This expression was used by the economist Clément Colson at the end of the 19th century to describe
railroad freight tariffs. Colson was a student of the original French engineer-economist, Jules Dupuit
(1801–1866), who demonstrated that a monopoly will not conflict with the public interest if it sets
the price of services according to their importance to the user. This concept was the basis for rational
pricing of railroad fares and public utilities.
For the Love of Math and Measurement 99
As a company created by computer scientists trained in the
discipline of math, Google clearly sees statistical measurement, or
metrics, as highly important. User behaviors are continually scanned,
analyzed, and applied.
Real-Time Data Analysis
The direct data collected by Google’s servers in real time is infinitely
more reliable than the results of traditional research and market
surveys. Extracting behavior models has replaced the traditional
cycle of studies that rely on establishing assumptions and designing
investigation protocols, surveys, and results analysis.
Not only is real-time market research a more precise way to
measure user behavior, but this research is also far less expensive than
traditional studies, offering results that can be used immediately.
When you can graph real-time data and use it to predict behaviors,
you don’t have to rely on intuition as much.
In addition, because Google processes so much data, the company
can narrowly segment user demographics and discover niches
that would be invisible with smaller samples. (A small or invisible
correlation on a sample of a few thousand people can become significant
with a sample of several hundred thousand.)
Numbers Are Key
Google’s virtually compulsive hunger for quantitative information
puts it at the vanguard of a movement shared by companies like the
fashion houses ZARA and H&M, the steel conglomerate Mittal,
and the consumer goods giant Procter & Gamble. By processing
real-time customer data quickly and acting accordingly, these companies
are able to adjust their production schedules and marketing
activities rapidly.
But differences exist among these companies. First, Google’s
massive use of data is not centralized as it is at a company like Mittal,
where plant managers present the head of the company with a total
of 66 technical reports (including fuel consumption, specific turnaround
times measured in minutes, and so on). Centralization allows
top management to practice ongoing performance benchmarking.3
100 Chapter 9
With Google’s decentralized approach, information is distributed
broadly within the company: Its many intranet-based analytical tools
make analyzing and interpreting data easy.
Second, at Google the use of quantitative analyses is not hindered
by lack of technical expertise as it is at other companies.
According to Thomas Davenport, writing in the Harvard Business
Review, “Analytical talent may be to the early 2000s what programming
talent was to the late 1990s. Unfortunately, the US and
European labor markets aren’t exactly teeming with analytically
sophisticated job candidates. Some organizations cope by contracting
work to countries such as India, home to many statistical experts.”4
This reliance on mathematics is one of Google’s hallmarks.
Few companies use as much math in their customer relationship
vocabulary. Placing an advertisement on AdWords or AdSense is a
lesson in how to quantify and interpret statistical data. For those
who associate advertising with creativity, the focus on mathematics
is a leap into a new universe.
This taste for mathematics is not limited to the collection and
analysis of quantitative data, however. Where others might look for
Hiring: Measurement to the Rescue
Psychologists have long used math to evaluate people and measure cognitive
abilities, attitudes, and personality traits. They typically use tests
with questions that may seem odd or banal. But behind these questions,
you usually find sophisticated techniques borrowed from mathematics
and statistics, including factor analysis (describing variability among
variables), multidimensional scaling (exploring similarities in data), data
clustering, and structural equation modeling (testing causal relationships).
These techniques have not been lost on Google. For example, in
2006, its HR department asked all employees who had been working in
the company for at least five months to fill out a 300-question survey.
The data collected were compared with 25 measures of each employee’s
performance (which shows that performance is very carefully monitored).
The aim was to find predictors of performance and adaptation to the
company’s very special culture.
This survey is now used to select the best candidates from among
the more than 100,000 people who submit job applications to Google
every month.
For the Love of Math and Measurement 101
a Band-Aid solution, Google engineers use formulas to see the speed
and contour of a problem. Their mathematical culture leads them
to search for the general principle behind individual user behavior.
This culture allows the engineers not only to apply solutions but
also to interest the scientific community in problems and mobilize
outsiders in the search for solutions. Spam and click fraud (more
on this in Chapter 15) are two good examples. What might be seen
only as technical problems of quality or safety at many companies
become projects for outside researchers who contribute their expertise
in the service of the company.
Mathematics and Management
Mathematics also directly affects Google’s management methods. The
practice of reasoning encourages precision. Mathematicians know
the problems of approximation that are encountered in everyday
life, but they discuss these problems with discipline.
“To speak with rigor about what is approximate”5 is one definition
of math that applies to Google’s management practices. Nothing
moves forward that isn’t backed up by data or can’t be proven. This
sometimes gives meetings a hard edge (an opinion had better be
provable, or it’s likely to be disputed and attacked), but this rigor
avoids smokescreens and most errors of logic such as the very classical
confusion between volume and duration. (This confusion is
exemplified by a very old question: Is the increased prison population
really due to higher crime rates, or is it caused by longer sentences?)
This pervasive scientific reasoning affects the atmosphere at Google,
motivating employees. What better motivation than the desire to
find a solution to a long-unsolved problem?
But this rigor can also breed arrogance, which is less a psychological
factor than the natural result of a quasi-imperialistic view of
truth. “Any mathematician, in everyday life, never stops speaking
about truth and falsehood; what interests him is finding out what is
true,” explains Laurent Lafforgue, a renowned theorist in contemporary
mathematics, who adds, “In mathematics, once a theorem
is presented, it is there forever.”6
102 Chapter 9
When Math Is Used to Solve Problems
Related to Language
Google doesn’t just exploit commercial information; it also applies mathematics
to improve the performance of the Internet. This application
involves one of the most advanced areas of research, data mining—the
field originally chosen by Sergey Brin.*
In 1995, he published an article showing how mathematics could
contribute to the usefulness of information related to literary analysis
as well as equations.7 The article, written with two Stanford professors,
addresses plagiarism. The idea is quite simple: When an author publishes
a book, he or she loads the text into a “copy detection server” that slices
it into a multitude of fragments as sentences are tagged and classified in
a huge digital library. Each time a new work is published, the work is
compared with what is already in the database. Two documents showing
a relatively high percentage of similarity (how much is not specified)
indicates possible plagiarism, which a human reader can then check.
This has a certain irony, considering Google’s copyright problems.†
A similar mechanism is used in spelling and grammar checkers and
particularly in machine translation. Language differences constitute a
subject that is both extremely difficult and crucial for further development
of the Internet. Language barriers create immense gray areas
and make thousands of relevant pages unavailable to users. Current
solutions to machine translation are pretty primitive. All you need to
do is translate any text from a foreign language with one of the available
programs and then retranslate it back into the source language to
* Another data-mining specialist at Google is Udi Manber, the author of Sif, a file analysis
program. Manber became a manager in Google’s engineering department after having worked
at Yahoo! and Amazon.com. He wrote another program to identify similarities among sequences
in Java programs, thus helping to eliminate redundancies that unnecessarily complicate code.
This program has implications for plagiarism detection and other data-mining applications.
† Google has been taken to court several times for copyright infringement—for example,
alleged violation of publishers’ copyright (Google Book Search) and YouTube’s hosting of
copyrighted videos or songs.
For the Love of Math and Measurement 103
see how far these solutions have to go. Google’s web page translation
feature delivers readable, if clunky, results for pairs of similar languages
but near-gibberish for some other combinations.
In considering these issues, Brin, his co-authors, and everyone else
interested in these questions are dealing with problems not encountered
in traditional structured databases that use only data specified in advance.
A name, a date of birth, or a sales total is defined as an object (identity
type) and also by its form (the numbers or characters contained in the
entry). But text in a normal document doesn’t work this way. Automated
analysis will require answers to the following questions:
• How can text be automatically separated (“chopped,” in the authors’
terminology) into relevant units? This separation can be done
only by recognizing material elements such as punctuation marks
and blank spaces. Yet separating a block of text into sentences is
a complex process because the period that the human eye sees as
marking the end of a sentence is also used to separate letters in
abbreviations like “U.S.”
• What are the relevant units (specialized vocabulary terms that will
vary in length) for the task at hand? These will differ depending
on whether the goal is to detect plagiarism, translate languages, or
suggest optional synonyms or syntax within the same language.
• Which units will be most efficient, given the dual constraints of
machine capacity and speed?
Finding answers to these apparently simple questions requires the
development of complex, extremely powerful algorithms. As only one
example, the tests described previously using the plagiarism detection
engine found a significant noise level of coincidental verbatim repetitions
(0.6 percent, or the equivalent of two to three sentences per paper) in
articles on totally unrelated subjects. Thus, the solution did not reach
the level of sophisticated analysis.

10
Keep the Teams Small
One of the most common principles of management
theory since at least Henri Fayol* says that
a hierarchical structure can only be truly effective
with one manager for a maximum of seven employees.†
Beyond that, control is lost, and quality and
productivity decline. As explained by proponents
* Henri Fayol (1841–1925), a French management theorist, was a key figure in the turn-of-thecentury
Classical School of management theory. He is considered by many to be the father of modern
operational management theory.
† This thesis was redeveloped more recently under the term span of control. The later work arrives at
the same conclusions Fayol did on the day before the First World War.
106 Chapter 10
of the span of control theory, developed by Sir Ian Hamilton in 1922,
managers have a finite amount of time, energy, and attention to
devote to their job. To quote Hamilton, “The nearer we approach
the supreme head of the whole organization, the more we ought to
work towards groups of three; the closer we get to the foot of the
whole organization, the more we work towards groups of six.”1
This ratio of 1 manager per 7 subordinates is applied just about
everywhere. According to the Statistical Abstract of the United States:
2004–2005, about 1 in 10 employees in the United States is a
manager, and the ratio is not much different in other countries. (In
France, the estimate is 1 manager for every 7.5 workers.)
This principle applies most everywhere it seems, except at Google.
For example, at the end of 2005, the company had 1 manager for
every 20 employees; a year before, you would commonly see a single
manager supervising more than 40 people.
Was this a mistake of youthful inexperience? Or perhaps a delusion
of idealists who knew nothing about effective management?
Perhaps a deficit caused by fast growth? All of those criticisms were
voiced, but wrongly. This extremely light structure, short on managers,
results from the desire to create a company that is innovative,
nimble, responsive, and fast on its feet.
Fight the Bureaucracy
Larry Page, Sergey Brin, and Marissa Mayer discovered the world
of business when the conventional wisdom among managers was
“downsizing is the solution.” They heard plenty of criticism of the
bureaucracy within large companies and surely observed previous
disasters in Silicon Valley. They knew, too, that many once-powerful
companies had choked to death on what John Kenneth Galbraith, in
his book The New Industrial State, called their technostructure—the
influential management cliques inside a large company that control
economic decisions.2
But even if they had not studied management texts, Google’s
original core group would have known that a light infrastructure
would reduce costs, distribute payroll more equitably, avoid bureaucratic
trends, and inhibit the natural propensity of managers to
Keep the Teams Small 107
hire too many people. But knowing that it is better to build an
organization that can function with a light management framework
is one thing; doing it is another.
Of course, criticizing the technostructure is easy, but it does perform
some needed functions. Among its benefits, the technostructure
ensures coordination, organizes and controls workflow, and offers
a way to communicate instructions, objectives, and information
throughout the organization. When you reduce the technostructure,
you need to replace it with something. Google has chosen to replace
much of that technostructure with technology itself and small teams.
The economic model that Brin and Page chose simplified the
task. Cutting out the cost of ad sales through automated bidding
reduced all the costs related to sales as well as the overhead needed
for contacts and conversations with customers. Publicity, marketing,
sales initiatives, in-house price discussions, and price negotiations
with customers all consume time and contribute to bureaucracy’s
growth. Google has reduced many of these costs, but this cost reduction
is only a part of the story.
Small Teams Facilitate Innovation
Google’s structure is so light because Brin and Page wanted to reduce
the coordination and administrative costs that hamper engineers
and reduce the time devoted to innovation. Time spent reading and
writing proposals, negotiating, explaining choices, ensuring instructions
are understood and followed, and enforcing policies is time
taken away from inventing.
Google accomplishes this feat using several parameters simultaneously.
I’ve already discussed one innovation, the 20 percent rule
for personal projects. But another important innovation is Google’s
use of small, autonomous teams.
Google certainly didn’t invent the concept of small teams. The
group that developed the first Apple Macintosh consisted of no
more than five people—at the beginning. Bill Gates has often sung
the praises of small teams (which is not to say that he succeeded
in imposing them at Microsoft). And well before those innovators,
several authors warned companies against using large teams. But
108 Chapter 10
even if many people know the virtues of small teams, few know
how to make full use of them and are able to resist the propensity
of teams to grow.
Google’s stroke of genius comes in assigning projects with limited
objectives and short deadlines that are seldom longer than six
weeks. Google executives say this organizational model, which puts
stringent constraints on performance and time, was implemented
because it allows numerous projects to be developed simultaneously,
and it results in more invention. Google can roll out new releases
within short intervals because hundreds of projects are completed
using only a few thousand engineers.
But the model has other advantages. For one, small teams improve
productivity and efficiency. By limiting teams to a maximum of
six people, the company must subdivide projects into units that a
small group can complete. In practice, this requires precisely defined
goals and easily monitored deadlines, which equates to managing
by objective. Set the goal and your employees work to reach it. The
idea is simple enough: You’ll get better results from a team if you
first define what you want the team members to accomplish.
Because projects are short in duration, deadlines are easy to
track, and problems appear quickly, which means they can be
solved quickly. Small teams also help projects move fast—a key to
success on the Internet. Daily pressure to achieve short-term goals
is strong, and peer pressure to focus on the task at hand is a potent
force. Take it from Jeff Bezos, founder of Amazon.com. When a
Wall Street Journal reporter asked Bezos for the secret to his success,
he replied, “To work quickly and correct the small errors later. The
only fatal error on the Web is to be too slow.”3
Small Teams Are Efficient
Because small teams are ill equipped to win political battles for additional
resources, their members tend to eschew hallway politics and
seek technical solutions instead. In order to advance their project,
team members stick to norms, use available modules, and generally
work in more efficient ways.
Keep the Teams Small 109
Even in a company as rich as Google, the resources available to
small teams are inevitably limited; they have to make do with what is
quickly and easily procurable. After all, why reinvent the wheel when
resources are scarce? Why not just use the wheel and put your efforts
elsewhere? And Google is not hesitant to use existing tools—such as
open source databases or the Linux operating system—when those
tools meet its needs. If a program is suitable, Google will adapt it
to house standards rather than rewrite it from scratch.
Small teams also prevent freeloading and can reduce conflicts:
Each member’s performance is easily observed, and peer pressure
ensures that everyone pulls his weight. When deadlines are looming,
employees tempted to shirk their responsibilities are quickly detected
and castigated, leaving little time for political nonsense.
Small teams force their members to be creative because a boss
isn’t present to give specific instructions on how to do things. They
also give rise to a certain versatility. People in charge of very large
projects must divide work and delegate tasks to subordinates, who
tend to create further bureaucracy, including their own management
committee, organizational chart, and other departmental functions
like human resources, communications, and finance.
It’s Not Just the Size
By reducing the need for controls and giving employees more
autonomy, small teams with precise objectives and deadlines can
dramatically reduce the need for management oversight and facilitate
the construction of flat organizations. But this is not all.
Google uses teams of three to six people. This number is a good
one if you take Jeff Bezos’s word for it: “To the degree that you can
get people in a team small enough that they can be fed on two pizzas,
you’ll get a lot more productivity. About six people is a good size.
But it depends on how hungry the people are.”4
According to three German researchers who studied the performance
of a variety of companies around Cologne, Germany,
the optimum workgroup size is three people. As soon as the group
exceeds four people, effectiveness (measured by weekly hours worked
by each member) starts to decline, as shown in the following figure.5
110 Chapter 10
Size is obviously important, but simply creating small teams is
not enough. From what is known about Google’s methods, management
plays a key role in making sure everything functions perfectly.
The composition of the team is one key to its success. The better
qualified a team’s members, the better the team will function.
In companies that have undergone the transition from a traditional
to team-based structure, the more qualified people spontaneously
gravitate toward the team approach where more personal responsibility
is required.
A certain level of heterogeneity in expertise improves team performance
because the people who work together complement each
other as they observe and learn from fellow team members. The
rate of turnover is also crucial: Small teams should be short-lived in
order to fight the development of bureaucracy.
Finally, consider the work environment and the company’s
organization. Small teams are effective at Google because internal
communication keeps everyone up to speed on the progress
of individual projects. Competition among teams, or at least the
possibility of comparison, improves productivity, too, as shown by
several lab studies.6
The idea of small teams is not new. If they appear to be more
effective and durable at Google, it’s because the company has developed
a particular cultural environment that supports small teams
and encourages their development.
Graph of optimum workgroup size
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Productivity
Number of people in group
11
Coordination Through Technology
In order to be effective, small teams need a special
ecology. Google created one by mobilizing technology
to solve the biggest problem of any business:
that of coordinating people and their responsibilities.
But the company didn’t stop at giving all
its employees a powerful computer system with
leading-edge applications. Google built an organization
that enables people to share ideas and project
specifications quickly.
112 Chapter 11
People who want to work together have many ways to coordinate.
Within a corporation, management generally determines how coordination
happens. Managers oversee the work of their employees and
coordinate efforts by dividing work and distributing it sequentially:
Each step in product development is a cog in the industrial assembly
line immortalized by Charlie Chaplin in his film Modern Times.
But other types of coordination do exist. The influential sociologist
James D. Thompson, founding editor of Cornell’s Administrative
Science Quarterly, identified three modes of coordination in his work
Organizations in Action:1 sequential, reciprocal, and community, also
called, respectively, coordination, cooperation, and collaboration.
They are defined as follows:
• Sequential mode is based on the traditional corporate hierarchy:
Employees are given specific tasks and are supervised to make
sure they follow directions.
• Reciprocal mode is based on constant interactions among participants.
For example, Thompson describes the traditional
relationship between a physician and a nurse. The nurse prepares
the patient for the physician; the physician completes his or her
task; then the doctor returns the patient to the nurse.
• Community mode is based on autonomous players’ sharing common
resources. Thompson’s example in this instance is that of
teachers in schools. Teachers work individually in their own
classes, but they share classrooms, the library, and administrative
services.
Google adapted the last of these models, community or collaborative
mode, to industrial engineering. Whether they did so as a
result of reading Thompson I cannot say. What seems clear, though,
is that they adopted the organizational model they knew best—that
of the university.
At first glance, using the field of education as a model for building
an effective, dynamic business may seem strange, yet the academic
model has some interesting characteristics. First, it functions with
a weak hierarchical structure: In the case of a large institution, one
chancellor or president and a small board of regents enable the
Coordination Through Technology 113
university to function with thousands of students and hundreds of
professors.
Second, an educational institution also allows its employees
(the faculty) a high degree of autonomy. Their work is guided by
curricula (universities in Boston, Los Angeles, London, and New
Delhi use many of the same textbooks), and faculty require little
daily supervision. Criticism from students and their parents checks
those who stray from the program, thus ensuring a relatively high
degree of conformity. By taking inspiration from academia and following
a collaborative model (whether they call it that or something
similar), Google has limited coordination overhead and standardized
common resources like databases and data processing languages.
The Technology of Shared Information
For those who might be put off by this praise of the university model,
I’ll add that Page, Brin, and Schmidt did not simply replicate this
model without modifying it. They adapted, adding technology to
equip their staff with sophisticated coordination tools.
At first, Google used existing groupware, or Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW ), a term first coined by Irene Greif and Paul
M. Cashman in 1984 to describe a collaborative work environment
that can be supported by computer systems. CSCW software or
groupware contains four types of tools: communication (email and
videoconferencing); systems for sharing applications, files, or documents
(collaborative editing systems and forums); search engines to
find information quickly; and automated workflow management. For
example, at most companies a vacation request must be approved by
an employee’s boss and then by human resources. Workflow software
automates the transfer of the request and may also trigger a check
of the employee’s accumulated vacation time. Once approvals are
in order, the employee is notified. Human intervention is required
only if a problem arises.
The real development and deployment of collaborative workplace
tools began with the emergence of personal computers. One of the
pioneers of these tools, Terry Winograd, was Larry Page’s professor
at Stanford and went on to become a Google consultant. In the
1980s, Winograd worked with Douglas Engelbart, Harvey Lethman,
114 Chapter 11
and others studying work automation.2 Many companies today use
collaborative software that resulted from Winograd, Engelbart, and
Lethman’s research. What sets Google apart is that its management
team apparently had no doubt whatsoever about the value of using
these tools. They didn’t do a trial run to see if the software was viable;
they simply adopted it from the get-go.
Moma: Abundant Information
Before Google went public and regulations required more confidentiality,
employees could find everything about Google on the
company intranet, affectionately named Moma by its users. No one
really knows where the nickname originated, but one theory is it
refers both to a maternal image and New York City’s Museum of
Modern Art (MoMA), which is renowned for its large collection of
masterpieces and the creativity of its exhibitions.
Staff members connected to the intranet could find information
about ad sales in real time (a good way to see how the company
is doing), progress reports on various projects (which encouraged
them to pitch in when one fell behind), and many other aspects of
the company’s daily business.
In every case, information on Moma is presented in a way that
contributes to the company’s betterment. One good example is the
Google employee directory. Most directories found on corporate
intranets are as tedious as the phone book: a name, an email address,
and a phone number. Moma, however, also provides information
on individuals’ areas of expertise, describes their projects, and shows
their employment status—information that would normally be
considered confidential.
Rather than keep this information confidential, Google publishes
it so everybody can use it. This changes employee behavior. Knowing
coworkers’ objectives, limitations, expertise, and specific projects
discourages others from disturbing them needlessly. Bothering a
fellow employee with questions that he or she doesn’t have time to
answer or probably can’t answer is pointless. And, of course, publishing
an employee’s areas of expertise also encourages concern about
his or her reputation so the employee can work on maintaining and
improving it.
Coordination Through Technology 115
By widely distributing information in this manner, employees
adjust their behavior to suit the company’s needs and make best use
of their colleagues’ capabilities—without management intervening.
This openness helps create what Friedrich Hayek3 and Michael
Polanyi4 (familiar to many for his work on tacit knowledge and the
effects of self-organization within companies) called spontaneous
order: the spontaneous emergence of order out of seeming chaos.
Critics could argue that an abundance of information may have a
reverse effect. Everybody knowing (nearly) everything about everyone
else creates a form of mutual control within the group that is more
typical of a religious cult than a democratic society. No doubt that
is a price to be paid for a more systematic use of personal information.
However, no evidence exists that these tools have caused even
the slightest negative reaction at Google. Perhaps because Google
is a young company founded on innovation, coworkers are more
interested in other people’s accomplishments than their personal
attributes. In addition, everyone at every level has confidence in the
ability of technology to address social problems.
But are things so different in more traditional, hierarchical companies
where information is segmented? Motivational seminars and
other group activities that send workers to offsite events far from
their family and intense work schedules that don’t allow for a minute
of spare time are also ways to adjust behavior.
Blogs at Work
By now we all know about blogs—those sources of instant news and
personal opinion that took off with the advent of Blogger in 1999.
In September 2003, when Google acquired Blogger, management
immediately installed it on the company intranet. (At the time,
Blogger was called B.I.G., referring not to “big brother” but to
“Blogger In Google.”) Biz Stone, one of the creators of Blogger
and a subsequent co-founder of companies like Odeo and Twitter,
describes the Google intranet in his book Who Let the Blogs Out as
“one of the most amazingly vibrant and smart virtual playgrounds
in the world.”5
Soon, hundreds of Google employees had created personal blogs
as well as professional ones dedicated to a project, an idea, or a market.
116 Chapter 11
For instance, the blog for everyone who works on Blogger at Google
allows those employees to track industry news, competition, and
potential partners, as well as new developments, ideas, and projects.
Blogs are much more than online newsletters. They combine
the functions of writing and publishing with creating social bonds.
You can subscribe to a blog just as you can to a newspaper, except
most blogs appeal to a specific community with similar interests. The
blogs communicate information without management intervening,
and information is passed among players from different departments
without screening, bypassing divisions of labor, management, and
organizational structure that simply become irrelevant.
Blogs don’t disseminate information manufactured and controlled
from above, as with traditional memos and first-generation
knowledge-management tools. The information comes from coworkers
at lower levels and is coordinated by whoever needs the information.
By subscribing to a blog and commenting, people decide
whether to collaborate with others. They can create their own
activities of focus and feedback. Some blogs will become popular
whereas others disappear. In practice, blogging communities can be
established within a few days, weeks, or months and then fade away
when the topics that gave rise to them lose importance.
The benefits of blogs to a business like Google are immediate.
They translate into the following:
Time saved Rather than attend seemingly interminable meetings
where you listen to people talk about things that don’t
concern you or get involved with paperwork that has no practical
value, employees can turn to blogs for the information they
need, when they need it.
Concentrated information The information on blogs is of
high quality and depth. Information in a blog will be focused
on the needs of a limited number of subscribers who consult
the blog and comment when they have time.
Personal autonomy Unlike earlier project-management software
that automated procedures, blogs allow individuals who
build their own blogging community to set their own rules.
Coordination Through Technology 117
In the opinion of sociologists and other consultants, the fact
that the earlier tools did not allow this autonomy is why they failed
in other organizations.
With these tools, coordination among teams escapes management
scrutiny. This isn’t to say use of these tools amounts to anarchy—far
from it, even though things may look that way to outsiders. Google
employees have voluntarily placed themselves within a control-andcorrection
mechanism that is based not only on personal fame and
reputation but also on the vigilance of coworkers who are not at all
shy about correcting errors.
Instead of a formal corporate organization mapped by flowcharts,
Google relies on its social fabric, one that comprises networks of
confidence that arise spontaneously among employees. Organizational
theorists ignored these factors for a long time, as well as the work of
sociologists and ethnologists. At Google, these ideas are displayed
everywhere. With these tools, special-interest communities establish
themselves within the company. These transitory communities
develop values and criteria for judgment, build individual fame and
reputation, and introduce control mechanisms for individual activity.
They are more informal than those typically used by management
but possibly more stringent. One former employee described leaving
the company because he didn’t feel he was up to the job. His
impression that he wasn’t meeting expectations led him to decide
it was time to go.
All companies contain abstract communities built around many
different criteria: age, seniority, level of interaction in an office or
workshop, job experience, education, or vocation. Some traditional
managers consider these communities a threat to their own authority
and view them with suspicion. At Google, to the contrary, these
communities are equipped and mobilized.
A New Role for Management
All of this autonomy greatly modifies management’s role. Things don’t
work the same in a company where coworkers are free to coordinate
their own activities and in another where layers of managers insist
on controlling everything. Supervising 20 to 30 people instead of
118 Chapter 11
7 to 10 requires a different demeanor. Managing people is no longer
a question of controlling their work down to the slightest detail.
Incapable of tracking the daily activities of his or her staff and
forced to trust them, a manager who is under pressure from his or
her own boss must move quickly. Even if he or she is talented, the
manager won’t have time for small talk. Individual conversations
will be less frequent and inevitably shorter because time is limited.
The manager has to place more importance on facts, figures, and
measurable data. This requires a management style that is more
rational than charismatic.
This topic comes up regularly in conversations with the leaders of
companies operating in the new economy, not only at Google but also
at Amazon.com. According to Jeff Bezos, founder of Amazon.com:
For every leader in the company, not just for me, there are
decisions that can be made by analysis. . . . These are the
best kinds of decisions! They’re fact-based decisions. The
great thing about fact-based decisions is that they overrule
the hierarchy. The most junior person in the company can
win an argument with the most senior person with a factbased
decision. Unfortunately, there’s this whole other set
of decisions that you can’t ultimately boil down to a math
problem.6
These entrepreneurs reverse the traditional tendency in all companies
to associate knowledge, truth, and position. Traditionally, the
higher a person’s position in the organization, the more he or she
officially knows and the greater the chance that what he or she says
is likely to be true—or at least to be considered so.
Saying that decisions should be based on facts is not, of course,
original. What’s original is these leaders’ penchant for analytical
reasoning and, perhaps more important, the types of data they use.
They try as much as possible to work with real data, tangible figures,
and meaningful samples. By using technology, they can find the
facts; intuition and impulse give way to analysis.
By freeing the organization from a whole series of controls
necessary in traditional companies, communication tools have
allowed Google to grow without developing extensive systems of
Coordination Through Technology 119
bureaucracy and technostructure. A manager cannot control more
than six or seven people in a traditional organization because he or
she has to supervise and control not only the relationships between
himself or herself and each worker but also the relationships among
all workers. Each time a new team member is added, the number
of relationships that need to be supervised increases exponentially.
V. A. Graicunas, a consulting engineer who was the first to analyze
this problem systematically, demonstrated that increasing a group
from 4 to 5 members, and thereby improving its work capacity by
20 percent, would increase the number of relationships the group
leader would need to supervise by 127 percent (which might also
equal the increase in interpersonal problems).7 This progression
accelerates as additional staff are added, so much so that the task
quickly exceeds the brainpower of even the most brilliant manager.
For example, supervising 12 workers requires the manager to “track”
24,708 relationships. This result may seem odd at first, but this figure
includes direct relationships (from a superior to a subordinate),
cross relationships (from subordinate to subordinate), and group
relationships (from superior to any combination of subordinates).
The only conventional solution is to load up on technostructure and
create more management positions. But these superimposed layers
developed by management only breed more bureaucracy.
By equipping its workers with communication tools and letting
staff coordinate itself through mutual interaction, Google has
developed an organizational model that looks more like a rosette
or star polygon than the traditional
flowchart. In this model, wherein
each person maintains relationships
with everyone else, adding another
team member increases the number
of relationships that each person must
manage by one unit. Thus, the cognitive
limitations of managers are no
longer an obstacle to growth. The
company can increase its staffing
quickly without also creating a heavy
technostructure.
A star polygon
120 Chapter 11
This model is, of course, only one possibility—but it is one
that helps explain Google’s rapid growth. Page and Brin invented
the model, but they could have found inspiration in what Douglas
Engelbart envisaged in 1992, when he wrote one of the first articles
about using technology to facilitate coordination within companies.8
All of this greatly modifies management’s role. At Google, employees
have the means to coordinate freely. Unable to track the daily
action of his or her subordinates, the manager must have confidence
in his or her staff to accomplish the demand from higher management
to complete projects quickly. Even with a very large staff, a
manager has to get down to basics: upstream objectives and downstream
results, which means fewer, and necessarily shorter, meetings.
Knowledge domains of a manufacturing organization according to
Douglas Engelbart
Management
Marketing
Finance
Legal
Procurement
Subcontractors
Suppliers
Quality
Manufacturing
Engineering
Joint Venture
Partners
Customers
Coordination Through Technology 121
Information Technology and the Organization
Over the past 30 years, organizational theory has borrowed heavily from
several data processing models. The first computer systems, which were
large mainframes, were used to centralize functions within a company,
such as accounting and payroll. Until the end of the 1950s, large companies
still had decentralized management staff, with regional authority
for hiring, discipline, and wages. During the 1970s and 1980s, computers
led to increased centralization at headquarters, putting the data
processing department in charge of payroll. This movement coincided
with an effort to standardize and rationalize corporate rules. The advent
of minicomputers and then personal computers during the mid-1980s
reversed the trend, decentralizing some of these functions, particularly
the acquisition of data from the field.
During the 1990s, efforts were made to create companywide data
processing systems for Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP). The goal
was to consolidate and coordinate all applications and company data.
This consolidation would—at least in theory—give leaders a panoramic
view. These undertakings coincided with the development of complex
dashboards (or information displays) that went far beyond the cost
accounting systems devised at General Motors during the 1920s and
used by executives of conglomerates throughout the 1960s.
Balance scorecards that associate and integrate financial, commercial,
and human resources information illustrate this tendency. More recently,
network data processing has been used as the basis for a theoretical model
of how companies network with other companies. The influence of data
processing has become even stronger as programmers automate functions
with applications that have actually replaced many traditional analysis
methods within organizations. The most recent methods like Business
Process Reengineering (BPR) are directly inspired by this principle as
voiced by BPR’s creators Michael Hammer and James Champy: “Instead
of embedding outdated processes in silicon and software, we should
obliterate them and start over. We should ‘reengineer’ our businesses:
use the power of modern information technology to radically redesign
our business processes in order to achieve dramatic improvements in
their performance.”9 This sentiment applies to both data processing
methods and organizational structure, which are now merging in many
ways. Google’s management system further melds technological and
organizational paradigms.

12
The Secret Is in the Factory
In a world where new products are copied as soon
as they become popular, industrial successes are
often related to production innovations. Consultant
Michael Hammer, co-author of Reengineering the
Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution,
calls these “operational innovations.”1
Examples abound. Production principles are
paramount in the just-in-time system responsible for
Toyota’s success. Dell Computer became a market
124 Chapter 12
leader in record time by offering its customers made-to-order computers.
And Wal-Mart became the leading worldwide retailer by
reducing inventory storage costs.
Google is in an entirely different line of business, but part of
its success is due to its capacity to invent, or at least implement, a
powerful production system that its competitors cannot copy, simply
because this system is the company’s best-kept secret.
A Limitation Becomes an Asset
Like many other aspects of Google’s business venture, the devising
of its production system was a matter of chance. When Page and
Brin developed their search algorithm, they wanted to put the entire
Internet on their computers. Theirs was an irrational but natural
ambition: A search engine couldn’t really satisfy its users unless those
users could access every document available on the Internet, or at
least as many as possible.
Page and Brin’s ambition may have been unrealistic, what with
so many obscure nooks and crannies on the Web, but that didn’t
matter. This ambition led them to consider from the beginning how
to build a large-capacity computer system.
If Page and Brin had had more money, they surely would have
bought one of the powerful server systems available from several
manufacturers. But in 1998, a couple of college kids short on cash had
to scrounge for whatever equipment they could find. Historians tell
how they filled their office at Stanford and then their first workspace
with machines that were begged, borrowed, donated, or bought on
sale—a feat that would have been nearly impossible to accomplish
only 15 years earlier, when computers were much more scarce and
much more expensive. The fact that computers had effectively become
commodities by the late 1990s dramatically lowered entry costs for
these two entrepreneurs.
Redundancy
This limitation was an opportunity in disguise. Secondhand computers
aren’t necessarily in good working order, so they tend to break
down frequently and unexpectedly. The solution to mitigating this
defect is well known and obvious: redundancy. If you think one
The Secret Is in the Factory 125
component might go down, you replicate the data on other components
to decrease the risk of loss. Born of necessity, redundancy
became a centerpiece of the factory Page and Brin would eventually
build. (On a larger scale, redundancy has also allowed Google to
safeguard against disasters by distributing its servers geographically.
If an earthquake or a flood shuts down one server farm, servers in
other locations will be able to pick up the load.)
Initially, the perceived need for redundancy presented problems,
not least of which was where to put all that equipment. Here, historians
tell how Larry Page began invading nearby offices, a tactic
that didn’t work for long for obvious reasons. Early on, he and Brin
had to figure out a way to house all those computers within a small
space. The simple solution was to use rack cabinets with casters that
allowed them to be moved from place to place. You can easily see
how important that was for maintaining continuity.
This limitation also caused Page and Brin to pay close attention
to managing their computer network. Distributed data processing is
a complex, highly technical, and difficult endeavor, all the more so
when you’re trying to patch together a network of PCs that weren’t
designed to be used in that way.
Here, too, Page and Brin did something unconventional; instead
of entrusting the task to a networking specialist who might be limited
by yesterday’s techniques, they found Dr. Jim Reese, a neurosurgeon
whose career included years in medical computer science. Reese’s
unconventional experience led him to explore and eventually merge
ideas and concepts from computer science and neuroanatomy, a
discipline that traditionally deals with network plasticity. He chose
to build a system where computers are used for what they do best,
repetitive tasks, and where the network quickly reconstructs itself.
Powerful Production Equipment
Lack of funds and lack of space helped the Google co-founders to
build a unique, highly automated factory, using the latest means of
distributed data processing. The entire Google network is based on
a model for processing large data sets and dispatching tasks across a
large cluster, using MapReduce and the Google File System.
126 Chapter 12
MapReduce distributes tasks by running programs in parallel
on a large cluster of commodity machines. The MapReduce system
balances and manages program execution, allowing Google’s programmers
to utilize the resources of a large distributed system easily.
According to Google, “a typical MapReduce computation processes
many terabytes of data on thousands of machines.”2
The Google File System (first known as BigFiles) is a scalable, distributed,
high-performance file system designed to meet Google’s file
storage needs. The Google File System (or GFS) is a fault-tolerant
system that runs on inexpensive commodity hardware. The largest
GFS cluster as of this writing “provides hundreds of terabytes of
storage across thousands of disks on over a thousand machines, and
it is concurrently accessed by hundreds of clients.”3
Taken as a whole, Map Reduce and GFS allow Google to do
the following things:
Maintain data integrity Data is copied and recopied to several
machines, so it’s unlikely to disappear. When a failure occurs
on a particular machine, that machine is stopped and rebooted
automatically. If the machine doesn’t come back to life, machines
with duplicate data make additional copies elsewhere. This ensures
an almost zero likelihood of losing anything in the database.
Maintain network integrity If part of the network goes down
(for example, because of a natural disaster), or if the network is
taken offline for maintenance, users are routed to other servers
and can continue to use the service uninterrupted.
Facilitate maintenance and upgrades With pages replicated
on several different servers, any machine can easily be taken
offline and upgraded. Users are automatically and transparently
redirected to active machines.
Optimize production Because tasks are distributed among
several servers, they can be allotted according to the size and
popularity of their pages. Massively parallel computing ensures
that processors don’t remain idle while awaiting data. The principle
is similar to that in a workshop wherein everyone knows
how to perform several tasks, so they can easily fill in for one
another.
The Secret Is in the Factory 127
Reduce costs By reducing unutilized processing resources,
Google gets more productivity from each machine, making
them all more efficient and reducing costs by making continual
adjustments to resources that match current needs. With large
farms of small machines, Google avoids the “accordion effect”
typically experienced by companies that rely on large, integrated
systems: Because upgrades are costly and disruptive, they’re
postponed until the system slows to a crawl, at which point
companies add more capacity than they need (hence the accordion
name)—capacity that is wasted until demand catches up.
Google is said to have somewhere between 30 and 60 server
farms, depending on whom you ask. The exact figure is confidential
and probably changes regularly, but it is irrelevant anyway.
What is more important is Google’s ability to locate (or relocate)
data centers geographically to minimize data transfer time.
Long data transfer times are not a problem with textual data,
but when serving large video files, transfer time can be an issue.
note The use of remotely distributed server farms also has political
implications. For example, if the US government were to step
up its domestic surveillance measures and choose to rummage
through users’ personal data stored on Google’s servers, those
servers could all be moved to a country whose government has
a greater concern for personal privacy.
Use Existing Infrastructure
Google’s entire data factory is built on an extremely powerful software
platform, utilizing many tens of thousands of computers (according
to some estimates, as many as 450,000). This platform is surely one
of Google’s main strengths and its best protection against competition.
Mobilizing an army of microcomputers takes money, but even
with unlimited funds, quickly developing a system to manage all of
those machines would be far more difficult. Google’s ability to do so
ensures high performance and makes all the difference. Computing
power and software are mutually reinforced; the more data processed
in a massively parallel architecture, the higher its efficiency.
128 Chapter 12
Of course, Google could not have built all of this infrastructure
without the benefit of a mature data processing industry: The microcomputers
at the foundation of this formidable factory were—at
least at the beginning—commodity products like your everyday
office computer that cost no more than $1,000 each.
By all accounts, the system developed by Google’s engineers
could be described as technological cross-breeding. They were able
to move as quickly as they did because they often needed only to
borrow previous solutions for problems as they arose. Engineers
borrowed heavily from traditional supercomputing techniques,
especially for system management tasks, by using batch processing
techniques developed for large systems. Other solutions came from
experience with microcomputers, which achieved high performance
slowly because of their limited processing power.
For example, the filter that allows you to search documents
quickly is derived directly from technology used to optimize PC
hard drives. Google’s engineers also borrowed from relational database
technology: Data from web pages is broken into independent
units called shards, which are then stored redundantly on multiple
chunk servers.
Borrowing ideas and solutions from existing technologies gave
Google’s engineers more time to answer unfamiliar questions and
solve new problems, for instance how to build a scalable distributed
file system? How to compare and duplicate computer files? How to
automate all these operations and minimize their cost?
Finally, Google benefits from the recent surplus of data transmission
network capacity. The United States has a lot of dark fiber,
or unutilized optical cables.
In the 1990s, tech companies raced to modernize their networks,
resulting in gross overcapacity. Because the cost of building infrastructure
is higher than the cost of cables, companies overequipped their
facilities in anticipation of future needs. While waiting until these
resources are needed, these companies have chosen to rent out their
idle capacity, allowing Google to negotiate long-term contracts that
ensure high capacity at low prices.
The Secret Is in the Factory 129
At first, these rental agreements helped Google save costs by
eliminating the need to buy long-haul transport services to interconnect
data centers. In the long run, these agreements will enable
Google to develop activities that consume more bandwidth quickly,
like voice and video, and support new Internet standards that could
prove to be the next IT frontier.

Part III
Put Users First;
the Rest Will Follow

Like most companies, Google has a
mission statement or “philosophy.”
Google’s philosophy is divided into
10 points; each point is one sentence
long. The first and most interesting is
quoted in the title of this part of the
book. Unlike most corporate mission
statements, this phrase did not come
about through long committee discussions:
This statement is Larry Page’s
mantra. Early on, when people asked
134 Put Users First; the Rest Will Follow
him about financing his projects, he always replied with something
like, “Don’t worry about it. If our users are satisfied, if we give them
all they want and more, we’ll be able to find some money.” This
sentiment should be emphasized because it is exactly the opposite
of what business schools teach and management experts advise.
This concept is embedded in Google’s corporate DNA. In their
very first paper, Page and Brin criticized search engines that neglected
users at the expense of advertisers. Looking through the company’s
history and seeing how many arguments have been made against
advertising is amusing. In that first paper, Page and Brin analyzed
the economic model of funding search through advertising and
pointed out, “The goals of the advertising business model do not
always correspond to providing quality search to users.”1 In fact,
they stubbornly resisted all pressure to give in to the demands of
the advertising industry. Much of their success was to come from
this insistence on making Internet users their top priority. Since
that first paper, the Internet has become an international cultural
asset, and Google’s leaders have been given a thousand reasons to
change their mind. Would they have given in if they had been subjected
to constant pressure from a powerful marketing department?
Who knows. At any rate, they didn’t, simply because they had the
bright—and bold—idea to automate their relationships with their
customers entirely.
13
Automating Sales and User Relationships
Like all companies, Google has a sales department.
Omid Kordestani, Google’s head of Global Sales and
Business Development, was among Google’s first
40 employees. He has negotiated large contracts
with AOL, Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., and other major
companies. But the vast majority of sales at Google
are automated—without any salespeople involved.
I say automated where others might use the
term virtualized. The term I’m using, which better
136 Chapter 13
describes the process, alludes to industrial concepts of productivity
and efficiency as well as fears about putting people out of work.
Companies in other sectors have since adopted this major innovation
in their own businesses. To name only two travel companies,
Easyjet and idTGV (the online sales outlet of the French national
railway) have instituted automated sales systems similar to Google’s.
For many years, programmers have attempted to automate parts
of the sales process with Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
or Sales Force Automation (SFA) software. Both types of programs
attempt to automate the administration of customer relations, with
varying degrees of success.
Google’s system is radically different from either CRM or SFA:
It totally automates the sales transaction and fulfills the order. The
typical Google advertiser has no contact with a live person. No salesperson
contacts him or her, tries to persuade him or her of anything,
or negotiates prices. Everything happens between the buyer and the
computer—or rather between the buyer and the Google application.
In Chapter 2, I discussed how Google’s automated sales model
greatly reduces transaction costs and enables it to reach advertisers
far too small for other media. In this chapter, I’ll discuss the impact
of this advance on organization and management.
Eliminating Conflicts Between Sales and Marketing
Departments
Every company experiences conflicts between its sales force and its
marketing department. Salespeople are expected to contact customers,
present products, negotiate prices, and close sales. That is their
real work. But they are also expected to generate reports, maintain
customer records, and fill out forms. This information, in turn,
is used by the operations and marketing departments to define
production schedules, formulate marketing strategies, and launch
advertising campaigns.
Unfortunately, the salesperson’s dual responsibilities are in conflict
because they involve entirely different skills. Salespeople everywhere
complain, at least to some extent, about all the “red tape” and
paperwork. In fact, in some companies, red tape consumes as much
as 50 percent of a salesperson’s time. Sales managers sometimes get
Automating Sales and User Relationships 137
fixated on making sales quotas, and they chastise those who don’t
meet monthly goals, so the paperwork often falls behind. Conversely,
a salesperson who devotes the requisite time to completing administrative
chores may be criticized for falling behind in making sales calls.
This contradiction explains the chronic weakness found in
many sales departments, the dissatisfaction they generate at most
companies,* and marketing staffers’ frustration with the poor quality
of information received.
By fully automating the sales process, Google eliminates these
conflicts. Information comes directly from the customer and is sent
directly to the people who need it most—including the marketing
department—as well as upper management, engineers, and product
planners.
Note In Chapter 9 I mentioned that Eric Schmidt received information
every two hours about the spreadsheet that Google had just
launched. In a traditional company, he would have waited weeks
for a formal report from the marketing department. In how
many companies would the CEO spend even a second looking
at this type of information?
Automation also eliminates another fundamental source of tension
between the sales and marketing departments: conflicts over
prices and featured products. Management wants to market products
with high margins, but salespeople want to sell products that
are easy to move and that raise their commissions. With Google’s
automated auction, conflicts over pricing disappear as the price is
set by the consumer without Google’s interference.
The arguments over new products, an indirect obstacle to innovation
in most companies, also vanish. Before marketing a new product,
a company has to “sell” it internally to the salespeople, who need to
be motivated to devote time to the new product without neglecting
older products. They need training, new product literature, and new
sales tools to present to customers. To prevent errors in marketing
* According to an Accenture study in 2004, 56 percent of leaders in large companies rated the performance
of their sales forces as “average, mediocre, or catastrophic.” According to a more recent study,
executives gave their sales managers a score of 7 out of 10 possible points. Tom Atkinson and Ron
Koprowski, “Finding the Weak Links,” Harvard Business Review (July–August 2006).
138 Chapter 13
information and to avoid alienating the sales force who often approach
new products with a healthy dose of skepticism, marketing people
typically spend a considerable amount of time on research and
preparation before presenting new products to the sales force.
But all of this preparation takes time and money and delays the
launch of new products.
Complete sales automation eliminates this obstacle to growth as
well: the time needed to build and train a sales staff. Studies show
that companies with strong growth need to anticipate and recruit
salespeople before the companies grow if they don’t want to miss
out on sales early in a product’s lifecycle. Companies have to invest
in new salespeople before launching a major new product; making
that commitment requires not only confidence in the company’s
future growth but also the resources to finance and equip these
people. If companies train salespeople for a product that fails, they
risk overextending their finances and taking significant losses. But, at
the same time, if they don’t expand their sales force prior to product
release and wait instead until the last moment, they’re forced to do
emergency recruiting, lower their selection criteria, and send out
undertrained representatives.
Automation also changes the strategies of players and eradicates
two well-known perverse effects. First, it renders useless the customer
tactic to delay a purchase until the supplier has no option but to
cut prices. In some industries, including software, many customers
wait until the end of a quarter or a year to make purchases. They
know that salespeople who need to make their quota will bargain
so they can close out the quarter or the year with higher total sales.
This delay unbalances the salesperson’s workload and drives prices
lower than the marketing department’s projections.
Second, automation also reduces another perverse effect of commission
sales, one that frequently victimizes companies specializing
in new technologies. It goes like this: A salesperson delays or advances
the date of a sales contract by a few days in order to maximize his
or her income. If the salesperson has doubts about his or her future
with the company (or, worse, doubts about the company’s future),
the salesperson will get his or her customers to close sooner in order
to maximize sales that will determine the bonus for that period. Or,
Automating Sales and User Relationships 139
if the salesperson is confident in his or her future and that of the
company, he or she might delay the contract a few days for tax reasons.
These shuffles artificially skew the results used by company
managers to calculate sales forecasts. If these manipulations occur
infrequently, they don’t matter much, but if all the salespeople do
the same thing at the same time, the forecasts will be off, leading to
bad relations with investors who may think they have been deceived.
(Several companies have been severely sanctioned by the financial
markets for making artificially inflated forecasts based on bogus
end-of-year sales figures reported by salespeople.)
In both cases, sales automation smoothes out cycles and enhances
the accuracy of management information.
Understanding User Behaviors
By obtaining more direct information on what users do, a company
can bring its customers closer to everyone involved in supplying the
products. At the same time, engineers tend to abandon the defensive
attitude they often display when marketing staff or salespeople try
to give them advice on what products to create.
Odd as it may seem, customers have a singular advantage over
all these professionals: They make the ultimate decision about a
company’s future products and services. And, ironically enough,
sales automation actually improves the ability of those in charge of
the company to listen to their customers. By “depersonalizing” the
sales process, managers are able to follow and observe actual customer
behavior, thereby receiving an infinitely richer information source
than the usual demographic categories used by marketing people,
such as occupation, income, and age.
Sales automation also eliminates the skewing that can affect
surveys, opinion polls, and reports from salespeople. (Researchers
who delve into these issues—including sociologists, ethnologists, and
marketing experts—stress that the observation of actual behaviors
generally produces very different results from those derived from
polls based on statements.*)
* In the field of marketing, a whole body of literature is devoted to observation of customer behaviors.
The articles conclude that this research method is highly efficient in the quality of information it
provides but very costly. Of course, automating the customer relationship decreases the cost.
140 Chapter 13
Finally, sales automation eliminates the potential mismeasurements
caused by self-consciousness and rationalization. Automation
improves the accuracy of behavior measurement because users
can’t adjust their answers to suit their own standards of acceptability
or what they think is expected. For example, a study done at
Ball State University using real-world measurements suggests that
people actually use the Internet twice as much as they say they do
on questionnaires.1
But Where Did My Sales Rep Go?
Sales automation clearly has many advantages, but it can’t completely
eliminate all shortcomings, mistakes, and difficulties. At
Google, as with any service company, some incidents require human
intervention.
Although search engine users rarely complain about the quality
of service they receive, those who maintain forums and blogs and the
advertisers that work with these sites do. Bloggers complain about
not seeing their site in search results. Did my site disappear because
of a decision made by Google or because of a flaw in the algorithm?
Advertisers complain about incorrect charges. “As a representative
of companies that spent more than $300,000 on your AdWords
program, I am writing this letter to you in the hope that someone
will respond to me,” wrote one customer who was unhappy with
the lack of response from a salesperson assigned to him. “Why,” he
went on, “does Google treat me badly like a vagrant trying to buy
a cup of coffee for a dime at McDonald’s?”2
This leads to a final point about the downside of automation (for
corporations)—that is, the emergence of greater consumer power
(an upside, of course, for the consumer).
When things go wrong in a traditional business, the problem
is nearly always handled privately—whether by phone, email, snail
mail, or a meeting. In the new virtual marketplace, without personal
contact, correspondence, or meetings, a dissatisfied customer
may turn to the Internet, post a message on a blog or forum, and
thereby inform a large group of customers about his or her problems.
Complaints thereby pass from the private sphere to the public
domain, which creates a new problem for the company.
Automating Sales and User Relationships 141
This public method of complaining is often the only way to reach
a company with a complaint and can exert far stronger pressure than a
private complaint. Many companies seldom pay much attention to
dissatisfied customers, but they are far more attentive to those who
display their discontent publicly because these complaints can have
far-reaching effects on the company’s reputation.

14
Putting Users in Charge
Once consumers were kings. Now they’ve become tyrants.1
—McKinsey & Company
Some companies have risen to fame surrounded
by armies of enthusiasts (like Apple), while many
others—like big oil, chemical companies, armament
manufacturers, and agribusiness—have faced hostile
press campaigns. But never before has a company
like Google been constantly under the eyes of millions
of observers throughout the world.
144 Chapter 14
Online Communities: A New Force
Scores of blogs are devoted to news about Google, its projects, and
its products. Some, like Google Blogoscoped (http://blogoscoped
.com/) by Philipp Lenssen, focus on monitoring the company. Still
others, like Ogle Earth (http://ogleearth.com/) deal only with specific
tools like Google Earth, the company’s mapping service.
Estimating the total volume of these ongoing communications
about Google in the blogosphere isn’t easy, but by all indications, the
numbers are probably huge. According to Technorati, a company
that specializes in observing the blogosphere, many thousands of
comments tagged with the word Google are posted daily on blogs.
For example, as you can see in a recent 180-day snapshot of blog
posts tagged Google (see the figure below), an average day brings
somewhere in the range of 4,000 to 6,000 posts. Compare this
activity with tags like Obama, life, Apple, and even simply the word
search, and the tag Google is a clear standout.
Google on Technorati, July 2008 through January 2009
Putting Users in Charge 145
Whatever we take this data to mean, it seems clear that Google
is talked about quite a lot (though one can’t weed out the simple
use of the term google to mean search, since the word has entered
the vernacular). When we recognize that these blog comments are,
in turn, read by tens of thousands of Internet surfers who also talk
among themselves in forums and newsgroups, we can see how broad
the discussion is likely to be.
Bloggers who regularly comment on Google come from diverse
fields. They include journalists like John Battelle, users fascinated by
technology, ad customers, people selling site-design and optimization
services, and current and former Google employees. They even include
human rights advocates, like the creators of a blog that denounces
censorship in the People’s Republic of China (http://savegooglefreechina
.org/); people concerned about protection of individual liberties;
and many more. Their audience is also varied, including subscribers
who receive message feeds regularly and “passersby” who visit only
occasionally.
Authors, subscribers, and casual readers constantly move about,
circulating among groups. Like bees carrying pollen from flower to
flower, they distribute information. Every time something about
Google is mentioned, some of those who heard about the news
will share that tidbit with other groups, link to the information,
and share their comments and critiques. Thus the news circulates
within each zone of influence.
This process of diffusing information is fast and highly effective.
In a few hours, the whole community knows the latest. For example,
those who first learned of Google’s acquisition of Writely, an Internetbased
word processor, spread the news to tens of thousands without
any help from Google.
These new modes of information dissemination build media
bridges between topics that might otherwise remain separate. This
cross-pollination creates relationships among individuals who live in
different intellectual universes, allowing them to share lucky finds,
viewpoints, and breaking news. Far from the customary image of
the solitary Internet user in front of his or her computer screen, the
146 Chapter 14
Internet continually weaves social bonds and produces what could
be termed a computer-assisted collective intelligence.*
Online communities know no borders. Germans, Swedes, Norwegians,
and the French are no less active than Americans per capita.
The efforts of non-Americans, however, tend to be more successful if
they blog in English. Political frontiers may have disappeared on the
Web, but linguistic barriers remain, even though only 30 percent of
blogs are written in English.† This creates an unusual geography of
information, with dark zones and terra incognita. When Brazilian
authorities demanded information from Google about web surfers
who used its Orkut community site for illicit activities, the blogosphere
remained strangely silent, even though earlier similar requests
from the US government had caused an uproar. One might assume,
of course, that few members of the community at large can read
Portuguese.
Communities Serving the Company
Leveraging the power of online communities as a marketing resource
is nothing new, and many technology companies have been doing
this for years. But Google was the first to recognize the full importance
of these virtual communities and to analyze the many ways it
could employ them to further its own growth.
Like Microsoft, Apple, and others, Google gives away application
programming interfaces (APIs) that help users develop mini-applications
to complement Google tools. Most of these mini-applications
are just gadgets used to personalize the home page, the toolbar, or
the desktop. But developers can use these APIs to extend Google
gadgets, like Google Maps, building mashups that combine data from
different sources to create new applications that solve real problems,
and bring traffic to Google.
* This collective intelligence has assumed many varied forms: When customers shop for a book,
Amazon.com provides them with a list of books bought by other readers. This listing may offer
customers more clarity than many actual comments about the book. Alexa does the same with websites
and their visitors. Delicious, Kaboodl, and Furl allow users to build libraries or public collections of
pages, providing more alternatives to pool individual research efforts similar to those found in wikis,
the tool used to create Wikipedia articles.
† According to David Sifry of Technorati, which publishes periodic surveys of the blogosphere.
Putting Users in Charge 147
SketchUp is another good example of how Google has been able
to leverage the efforts of volunteers. This 3D modeling tool (acquired
when Google purchased @LastSoftware, a small startup) was released
in a free version with the sole aim of enabling users to build applications
that would extend Google Earth in interesting ways.
Google has extended this cooperative volunteer effort into areas
that most companies would retain for themselves, such as translating
pages, new product introductions, and indexing images (for image
search). In fact, Google is available in 130 languages today only
because volunteer hobbyists get together regularly to exchange tips
and tricks about the best way to translate documentation. And when
Google introduces images searchable by category, with captions, it
will be able to do so because of these contributions. (The company
even invented a game called Image Labeler, wherein a participant
scores points—with no tangible value—each time his or her entry
matches those of other players who propose captions for images
displayed by the software.)
But why would people volunteer to work for free for a company
as profitable as Google? Their motivations are diverse. Some jump in
just to be part of a Google project and to compete with other skillful
programmers. Others contribute out of philanthropy or in the
interests of activism: Volunteer translators want to see their language
gain greater currency on the Internet. “It’s enough to see my mother
using the Danish version of Google,” said one volunteer translator.
The quality of these volunteer translations is largely overseen by the
volunteers: Users correct one another.
In all cases, these volunteers assemble around Google because
of the tools provided and because they can prove their skills and
demonstrate their achievements to the whole wide world.
These communities of volunteers have played a defining role
in Google’s rapid success. In fact, saying they are the reason for
Google’s success would not be an exaggeration. Without them,
Google probably wouldn’t be the market leader that it is today. The
volunteers offer not only pools of expertise in which Google can fish
for assistance but also a rich source of market research. The minute
a new idea emerges, community members are on top of it, discussing
it and speculating on its chance of success. Where conventional
148 Chapter 14
companies must resort to traditional market research to discover
what their users want, Google has only to listen for the rustle of
ideas in the conversations of its followers. The trends that interest
marketing professionals are evident in their beginning stages as users
examine, analyze, and recommend changes to new products. And,
not surprisingly, these conversations also play a determining role in
publicizing new products.
The Rogers Diffusion Model
The technology adoption lifecycle is often illustrated by the normal
bell curve popularized by Everett Rogers in his book Diffusion of
Innovations, published in 1962. In his work, Rogers segments purchasers
into five categories: innovators, early adopters, early majority,
late majority, and laggards, as shown here.2
The rate of product adoption and purchase behavior is related
to psychological and sociological factors. Innovators actively seek
information about new ideas, with a focus on novelty. Early adopters,
on the other hand, consider the benefits that an idea or product
affords. The early majority deliberates for some time before adopting
a new idea, whereas the late majority approaches innovation with a
“skeptical and curious air” and does not adopt it until most others
have done so. Early adopters are opinion leaders—the people others
go to for their view on new products.
The five categories of technology adopters
2.5%
Innovators Early
adopters
13.5%
Early
majority
34%
Late
majority
34%
Laggards
16%
Putting Users in Charge 149
The Bass Diffusion Model
The Rogers model is easy to understand and apply to new product
releases, but unfortunately, it has become a bit old fashioned. Most
marketing theorists now prefer the Bass diffusion model pioneered
in 1969 by Frank Bass, an academic who is often referred to as a
founder of scientific marketing.3
The Bass diffusion model (shown here) describes the process
of product adoption as the
result of the interactions
between users and potential
users. The Bass model hinges
on the interplay of three factors:
market size, innovation
(customers who buy without
being influenced by the current
state of the market), and
imitation (customers whose
buying decisions are influenced
by others).
In the Bass model, the coefficients of innovation and imitation
are not fixed, as in Rogers’s theories, but variable. In other words,
purchase behaviors are not related to psychological factors. No
particular set of people is thought to be more naturally prone to
being pioneers than imitators (a fact that has been confirmed by
research). The person who buys a PC as soon as it is introduced
may delay buying that hot new mobile phone and may not own a
digital camera. People do not fall into discrete and fixed categories.
Bass also offers an explanation of imitation: “Imitators ‘learn,’ in
some sense, from those who already bought.”4 Thus, he introduces
into his analysis the concepts of competence (you don’t ask the same
person for advice about both choosing a dress and choosing a car)
and learning time, which is never instantaneous.
In the Bass model, the coefficient of innovation depends on the
number of innovators (those who talk about their technical choices
and act as opinion leaders) and the depth of their social networks.
The coefficient of imitation depends on the frequency of contacts
The Bass diffusion model of product adoption
Sales
Time
150 Chapter 14
between prospective customers and these opinion leaders. The more
innovators a prospective buyer meets, the more influential their
cumulative opinion becomes. What the first person said is reinforced
by the second and so on.
The growth of online communities hasn’t really changed the Bass
model; they’ve simply put it on steroids and yanked the Bass curve
toward the top left of the graph by doing the following:
• Broadening the market so it is no longer limited to demographic
segments defined by marketing objectives or to sales outlets
defined by distribution channels.
• Increasing public exchanges among innovators and turning
ordinary people into opinion leaders.
• Multiplying points of view and opinion, thereby reducing the
learning time needed by imitators and accelerating the rate of
adoption.
• Widening social networks, thereby increasing the leaders’ zones of
influence. A blogger who has just tested a product in California
can almost instantly reach one or even thousands of imitators
in Finland or Australia.
Finally, online communities have multiplied the contacts between
imitators and innovators. All it takes is a bit of curiosity on the part of
a potential imitator to quickly find opinion leaders who are ready to
answer his or her questions (or search for already archived answers).
Enhancements to the Product Adoption Models
Over the years, the Bass model has been enhanced by the addition of
other potential mechanisms that help explain Google’s dominance.
Some authors have replaced the concept of learning time with
conformism. Their assumption is that consumers, who are not experts
and who lack the time or desire to obtain expert information, are
happy to trust the majority vote and choose the most successful
products. This argument, recently advanced by D. E. Smallwood
and J. Conlisk, helps explain why the best products don’t always
win.5 In Google’s case, this argument explains why new users simply
Putting Users in Charge 151
flock to its search engine: They don’t take the time to ask experts;
they just follow the leaders.
Other theorists, like Albert Bemmaor, a marketing professor at
the ESSEC management school in France, have added a psychological
element to the Rogers Diffusion Model in an attempt to improve
its predictive accuracy. Bemmaor and others speak of a measurable
propensity to buy, which may be higher in some than in others.
They explain that initial purchasers of a new and largely unknown
product take higher risks than those who follow. As a consequence,
only those who aren’t intimidated by the risk will make the leap.
In order to reduce this risk, these pioneers share information that
they uncover in the media and in newsgroups. By supporting these
exchanges, communities help to reduce risk with discussions that
allow people to narrow their options and generally accelerate the
rise to power of products, standards, and suppliers deemed to be
the best and most reliable.
Communities and Word of Mouth
The increasing influence of online communities has spurred renewed
interest among marketing specialists in understanding the way that
information travels by word of mouth. Many companies have been
created to leverage relationships with online communities, often called
social media marketing, but this metaphor must be viewed with caution.
Despite some similarities between communities and word of mouth,
the phenomena are different.
Traditional word of mouth typically affects only a relatively close
circle of people at first. Information travels within small groups who
share similar interests. If you were to draw a chart of the spread of
ideas by word of mouth, the chart would look like leopard spots. In
contrast, because the boundaries of online communities are not limited
by proximity, information can travel much more widely. Online
communities lend themselves to the support and growth of dominant
products and comprehensive standards. They are also more likely to
be selective: The exchanges and rapid discussion among pioneers support
the adoption of the best solutions and inhibit the development of
low-quality products, which may not be the case with word-of-mouth
dissemination.
152 Chapter 14
Watching Every Minute
The communities that have been built around Google form a kind
of monitoring system that evokes Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon, a
type of all-seeing prison in which no action can be hidden. As with
open source software development, every time a new function or
tool goes live online, the community responds with questions about
the product and what it’s good for. Users test the tool and share
their analysis and experience. The often ruthless tests they devise
are thoroughly and frequently discussed.
Strategy is also monitored closely by these communities; none
of Google’s decisions escapes dissection, analysis, and discussion.
Questions like these are asked: Why this initiative? Why now? What
does Google expect to gain? Is Google’s release of the Chrome web
browser a frontal attack on the dominance of Microsoft’s Internet
Explorer, or is it just another tool to deliver Google apps?
Ultimately, this oversight boils down to ethical questions. Whatever
their origin, members of the blogosphere have a common
conviction: Search engines, blogs, and other Internet tools will revolutionize
the world and the way we live by bringing people together
in expanded virtual communities. Thus, concern about the moral
or policy implications of any web tool, as well as its performance,
is legitimate.
Four topics come up regularly in these discussions:
Protection of private data How far can search engines go?
Censorship Does Google have the right to censor information?
Dishonest use of technology How can phishing and click
fraud be stopped?
Intellectual property rights Who can make “fair use” of what?
As you can see here, conversations about these ethical issues
follow a specific pattern: If peaks occur sometimes, as with censure
(at the time of this survey, Google was under strong criticism for
having made an agreement with Chinese authorities allowing them
to block certain sites), the “noise” is usually continuous. The blogosphere
rarely interrupts its surveillance.
Putting Users in Charge 153
Ethical questions play a key role in the Internet industry because
the industry is largely unregulated and a moving target: Legislation
can hardly keep up with it. Nobody knows when new legislation
will be enacted to enforce regulations that govern copyright, royalties,
and protection of privacy, let alone what the laws will cover or
how they will be enforced. Internet users are all the more attentive
to Google’s behavior because they’re well aware that currently only
a voluntary code of ethics (perhaps one akin to Hippocrates’ famous
“Do no harm”) can prevent the company from behaving badly.
A Genuine Influence
Naturally, Google management can’t afford to ignore what online
communities say, and it doesn’t. Each day, managers and engineers
receive detailed summaries of comments about the company and
Censorship in China Protection of private data
Click fraud Copyright
Number of mentions, according to Technorati
154 Chapter 14
its products. The smallest defect is immediately spotted, noted, and
broadcast—not only to the company’s own employees but also to the
general public via the media. Many influential publications like The
Economist feature blog comments and analyses drawn from online
discussions about Google.
Because of the strength and influence of these online communities,
Google’s only choice once a problem is identified is to fix it fast,
which became clear when Google had to revamp the first version of
its video search engine, Google Video, because of user complaints.
These communities also prod Google into action: Any lag behind
the competition generates immediate comments and criticism.
Were Google to stop improving its products for a few weeks or
a few months, widespread speculation about possible problems,
challenges, and “creative breakdowns” would ensue. And because
financial analysts and journalists follow these blogs, the company’s
image would soon suffer, followed closely by its stock price.
Repeated questions about Google’s strategy finally convinced the
company’s leaders to state their objectives more clearly—which they
did in mathematical terms, of course. This trend began at a conference
of financial analysts in early 2005, and since then a number of
interviews have been published, including one with Marissa Mayer
that appeared in Der Spiegel in April 2006. In her interview Mayer
explained the 70/20/10 approach, which Google uses to allocate time
between its core business and its other products. Seventy percent of
all effort goes into search and advertising, 20 percent into satellite
products (like Gmail, Google Print, and Google Earth), and 10
percent is reserved for less grand ideas like Orkut. Mayer’s answer
was skillful in that it at once satisfied both the financial community
by reassuring them that most effort is devoted to the company’s core
business and the blogosphere by addressing their main concern,
which is innovation.6
The agreement that Google struck with Chinese authorities
shows how seriously Page and Brin take community opinion. Like
many executives in similar circumstances, they could have issued a
vague press release in response to this crisis and waited for the storm
to blow over. They could have waited to respond until the major
Putting Users in Charge 155
news media and congressional committees had fully addressed the
issue. Instead, they first responded to the surrounding communities
in their own language with a message on the official Google blog.
Rather than make justifications or excuses, they described their
concern, their equivocation, and the debate that had taken place
among those at the top of the company who wanted to proceed
at any cost and those who were concerned about the moral and
political issues:
Launching a Google domain that restricts information
in any way isn’t a step we took lightly. For several years,
we’ve debated whether entering the Chinese market at this
point in history could be consistent with our mission and
values. Our executives have spent a lot of time in recent
months talking with many people, ranging from those
who applaud the Chinese government for its embrace of a
market economy . . . to those who disagree with many of
the Chinese government’s policies, but who wish the best for
China and its people. We ultimately reached our decision by
asking ourselves which course would most effectively further
Google’s mission to organize the world’s information and
make it universally useful and accessible. Or, put simply:
how can we provide the greatest access to information to
the greatest number of people?7
This utilitarian rationale, straight out of Jeremy Bentham (the
net sum of pains and pleasures), continues the author of the blog,
led to this decision:
Filtering our search results clearly compromises our mission.
Failing to offer Google search at all to a fifth of the world’s
population, however, does so far more severely.
In later comments, Page even suggested that Google’s entry into
the People’s Republic of China had the positive effect of raising
awareness of censorship.8 This observation wasn’t entirely false, judging
both by the volume of questions posed on the topic in English
as well as in Chinese and as revealed by analyses of questions about
Google. Still, economic considerations were never raised—as if they
were unimportant.
156 Chapter 14
Reputation as a Motivating Force
Online communities not only influence Google, they also serve as
guardians of one of the company’s major assets: its reputation.
Everyone would agree that a company’s reputation is important,
but just how important was precisely measured only when
eCommerce prompted economists and marketing analysts to take a
closer look. In their study titled, “The Value of Reputation on eBay:
A Controlled Experiment,”9 these researchers tracked the sales of
postcards, electric guitars, comics, and even Gmail invitations (when
Google distributed its mail application by invitation only) on eBay.
They then expanded their research to compare the performance
of well-known sellers and newcomers. Their conclusions? A good
reputation helps not only to sell things but also at higher prices. The
variations are significant, with 5 percent more total sales at prices
averaging more than 6 percent higher when Gmail invitations were
used.
A good reputation also changes perceptions. For example, studies
carried out using a blind-taste-test principle give Google an unquestionable
advantage. Specifically, when a page of search results was
shown to 1,000 Internet users, it satisfied 800 of them when the page
was labeled as Google results. On the other hand, when the same
users were shown an unlabeled screen of the same results, slightly
more than 700 were satisfied.*
All of this suggests that once you’ve established a good reputation,
preserving it is worthwhile. You’ll also need to deserve that
reputation, however. And you’ll need to build awareness and prevent
any confusion by consistently imprinting your trademark image in
the minds of consumers—right? That’s what most communication
specialists believe, but they’re wrong.
Doug Edwards, the graphic artist who was in charge of the Google
home page in the late 1990s, described his surprise and concern when
Sergey Brin wanted to make changes to the Google logo:
One of the few convictions I brought with me to Google,
based on the two books I had read about branding, was that
* Similar results were reported by Jansen, Zhang, and Zhang in “The effect of brand awareness on
the evaluation of search engine results,” CHI, 2007, http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1241026.
Putting Users in Charge 157
you needed to present your company’s graphic signature in
a maniacally consistent manner; to pound it into the public
consciousness with a thousand tiny taps, each one exactly
the same as the one before. . . .
So I was caught by surprise when Sergey suggested that he
wanted to play with our logo on the home page. Remember,
this was not only the most prominent placement of our
signature logo, it was the only placement of our signature
logo. We weren’t advertising on TV or on billboards or in
print. The logo floating in all that white space was it. And
we were hardly so well known in 1999 that we could assume
people already had our brandmark burned into their brains.10
Brin got his way, and as Edwards recognizes today, Brin was right:
The quality of Google’s algorithm, its products, and its services is
what built the company’s reputation—not its logo.
The New Stakeholders
For moralists, actively seeking a good reputation presents an ethical
quandary. Spinoza, a 17th-century philosopher, wrote, “Fame has
the further drawback that it compels its votaries to order their lives
according to the opinions of their fellow-men, shunning what they
usually shun, and seeking what they usually seek.”10 For the purposes
of this book, this statement means that in order to maintain
a good reputation, individuals and companies need to agree with
their market and their customers.
For companies like Google, which operate in a market where a
good reputation is a major asset, complying as closely as possible with
the interests of its customers offers a powerful incentive. Communities
act as stakeholders in the company’s governance. Stakeholders are,
according to R. Edward Freeman who originated the concept, “people
or groups who can affect or who are affected by a company.”12
These communities of stakeholders don’t have representatives on
Google’s board of directors, as do shareholders and employees, but
by giving a voice to consumers who usually lack one, they move the
boundaries and shift the balance of power. By performing some functions
that are normally the tasks of sales or marketing departments
at other companies, online communities have reinforced engineering
158 Chapter 14
skills at the expense of management and technostructure, and they
counterbalance the influence of those who would change the company’s
economic model. (Articles about Google in the financial press
emphasize that having only one source of income—advertising—is
risky business.13 Whether this is true doesn’t matter; the stock market
believes it’s risky, so its constituents continue to pressure Google to
stop providing services for free.)
But of all the battles taking shape, the most important will concern
personal data, the outcome of which will determine the growth
of Google and all search engines. In this case, the opposing sides are
distinct and the balance of power is complex, but you can be sure
the online communities will be there. Overall, Google can expect to
find within its communities some expert partners who share both its
desire for technological development and its sensitivity to the fears
of its more faint-hearted users.
Lauren Weinstein is one expert who straddles both worlds. A
data processing developer, he collaborated on the initial development
of ARPANet, the military forerunner of the Internet. As an
ardent defender of privacy rights, he has sometimes been highly
critical of Google through his blog at http://lauren.vortex.com/. But
when Google management asked him to explain his point of view,
he addressed the engineers. His question to them was, could they
come up with a solution?
In an open letter to the company, Weinstein asked Google to
create a team dedicated to the protection of individual users, with
the goal of ensuring that Google products meet numerous acceptable
standards. In response, some months later, Google nominated
a privacy counsel.
On this issue, as with many others, users have imposed their
own rules. Because of their strong impact on its reputation,
it is easy to conclude that Google’s users have become a kind of
partner with Google, and their opinions are nearly impossible to
ignore.
Putting Users in Charge 159
In general, the concept of “stakeholders” is associated with
ownership—parties who control part of a company’s assets, whether
capital for shareholders or skills and expertise for employees. Online
communities give consumers the capacity to affect another significant
company asset: Its reputation and the value of its brand. This is
what BusinessWeek called “brand democratization,”14 an expression
that seems destined to endure. Through word of mouth and online
communities, consumers are doing the true marketing of brands.
Companies no longer own their brands; consumers do, and that’s
the power of putting users in charge.

Part IV
Challenges and Risks

Quarter after quarter, reading each
Google financial report has been like
watching the birth of a giant. As always,
people tend to speculate about what
might slow the company’s progress and
cripple its growth. Does the Colossus
have feet of clay? Where might difficulties
arise?
This exercise helps identify the
potential limits of the Google way. In
the following chapters, I discuss the
164 Challenges and Risks
various ways in which Google’s market has influenced the company’s
business and growth pattern. This discussion will, I hope, shed light
on a very central question: To what extent can Google’s contrarian
strategies be emulated and adapted by managers at other companies?
Finally, I’ll discuss the question of how well Google’s model will
be able to resist recessions and financial crises, like the one the world
is experiencing as this book goes to press.
15
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable?
When Page and Brin recruited Eric Schmidt, they
gave him a simple mandate: “Guide this fast-growing
dotcom company into adulthood.” Since then,
Google has grown into a world leader in advertising,
without compromising its core business of
Internet search.
In 1998, email was the main web-based application,
with search engines running far behind. In less
166 Chapter 15
than 10 years, and largely because of Google, the search engine has
become indispensable throughout the world.
The Growth of Search
The numbers speak for themselves. For example, according to the
Pew Internet & American Life Project, as of 2008, nearly half of all
Americans use a search engine on a typical day, and the growth of
that use is dramatic:
The percentage of internet users who use search engines
on a typical day has been steadily rising from about onethird
of all users in 2002, to a new high of just under one
half (49%). . . . Underscoring the dramatic increase over
time, the percentage of internet users who search on a
typical day grew 69% from January 2002, when the Pew
Internet & American Life Project first tracked this activity,
to May 2008, when the current data were collected. During
the same six-year time period, the use of email on a typical
day rose from 52% to 60%, for a growth rate of just 15%.
These new figures propel search further out of the pack, well
ahead of other popular internet activities, such as checking
the news, which 39% of internet users do on a typical day,
or checking the weather, which 30% do on a typical day.1
And the numbers continue to grow.
Search engines were originally conceived of as research tools,
designed to be used to find that figurative needle buried in the
Internet haystack. Today, search has become the main entry point
to the Web and is used to find everything—specific websites, the
age of a celebrity, the shortest route to a friend’s house, the weather,
scholarly research, and so on.
I would argue that this evolution only became possible because
Google found a way to derive ad revenue from search without making
the advertising intrusive and because the quality of Google’s search
results (hits) have continued to improve. But is this growth sustainable?
Will Google’s organizational structure allow the company to
continue expanding at the current rate, as new markets, new competitors,
and new problems and challenges emerge?
Google has tremendous assets and powerful resources to fight
most of the battles to come, but as you shall see, these battles will
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 167
have to be fought on several fronts including technical, legal, and
economic. And the fight won’t always be easy.
The Online Advertising Market
Let’s begin our analysis with the main area in which Google competes:
online advertising. As of this writing, the prognosticators
in the economic press—The Financial Times, The Economist, and
The Wall Street Journal, among others—have announced that the
Internet advertising market is nearly mature. Their critiques, based
on surveys by marketing professionals, forecast the end of two-digit
growth. The response rates of advertising have, they say, become
seasonal. As evidence, they cite a peak in the cost of clicks at the end
of the year—for example, from US$26 in August 2005 to US$56
in December 2005. This seasonal shift comes as no surprise because
sales typically rise during the fourth quarter of the year when people
are out holiday shopping. According to these critics, the shift is a
sign of maturity. That click prices rise and fall in proportion to the
cost of advertising in traditional media indicates a slowing market.
To support their thesis, journalists cite the deceleration of growth
in the number of searches in the United States, the oldest Internet
market. Thus, they say, Google can continue to grow only by increasing
its market share at the expense of its competitors.
These analyses are fairly easily to counter. For one, the market
for online advertising extends well beyond the United States. If
market penetration is very high in North America (73 percent),
Europe (48 percent) and Asia (15 percent) are expanding markets.
And almost every quarter brings new ways of delivering ads, whether
on blogs or through email, video, or social media.
Critics also cite technical arguments. For one, search, Google’s
specialty, makes up only 5 percent of total Internet activity. And no
less important, visitors don’t stay very long on Google’s home page:
They find what they’re looking for and off they go. That means many
people who use the Internet see only a limited number of the ads
appearing in Google’s search results, whereas ads are much harder to
escape when they’re delivered in email, in magazines, on television,
in movie theaters, or on the radio.
168 Chapter 15
The economic press also points to the difficulty of qualifying
site visitors. Unless visitors log into a Google account or iGoogle
before running their search, when they land on a page advertising
a product, advertisers know nothing about their financial status,
buying preferences, or likely age group. Google is clearly trying to
solve this problem by offering personalized search (which is great
for tracking users), but will that offering suffice?
Another challenge Google faces is that customers lured by Internet
advertising are far more fickle than those targeted by other modes
of advertising: They are only a click away from looking for a better
price, and the cost of switching from one seller to another is low.
The challenges of online advertising are all valid concerns, but
Google’s results suggest that these challenges are not likely to dramatically
affect its growth in the near term. For one, the number of
searches that result in advertising impressions has increased steadily
over time, and Google continues to dominate in search. Also, Google
can add to its revenue from search-supported ads by running ads in
other Google properties, like Gmail, Maps, and YouTube.
A more serious problem for Google could well be the current
global economic recession. When companies face difficult economic
conditions, they often cut their advertising budget. Of course, the
deeper the recession, the deeper the cuts are likely to be and, like
other companies that depend on those advertising dollars, Google
should suffer as a result. However, as of this writing, Google does not
appear to have been greatly affected. When hard hit by a recession,
consumers spend more time searching for the best deals—and they
can best do that on their favorite search engine. The United Kingdom,
one of the economies hardest hit by the recession, provides a good
illustration of this change in consumer behavior: Total retail sales
fell by 0.8 percent in December 2008 compared with a year earlier,
whereas Internet retail sales increased by 19.6 percent.2
Does this means Google is recession proof? Not necessarily.
Google will feel the pinch if its main advertisers decide to cut their
advertising budgets, as some did in late 2007 and 2008, but the
company will suffer less than most other media. In the long run,
Google could even profit from this economic crisis as more consumers
search and shop on the Web.
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 169
New Competitors with Different Economic Models
These arguments invite a closer look at the Internet advertising
market. As anyone who follows search advertising knows, Google
dominates not only because it dominates the search market but also
(and this reason is too often neglected) because Google delivers.
Advertisers spend more on Google than any other search engine
because it offers them the best results—the best click-through rate
(CTR ), the best conversion rate, cost-per-click, cost per order, and
so on.
But all of this can change. Dominating the search market does
not automatically translate into dominating the advertising market,
and competing search engines are always working to improve their
performance. (And they have smart engineers, too.) Advertisers
can also choose to spend their dollars in other ways, whether in
newspapers or magazines, on community sites like MySpace and
Facebook, and so on. All of these players compete with Google, and
each presents a real challenge to Google’s dominance of the online
advertising market.
One argument often made to support the company’s dominance
is that Google excels at mining data about its visitors that it then uses
to serve tightly targeted ads. But Google is not alone in doing this.
Some newspapers and magazines require you to subscribe to their
print edition in order to read their online articles, but most provide
free online content in exchange for membership registration. When
visitors register, they provide these companies with the demographic
information that advertisers need, which, in turn, allows traditional
media to offer their advertisers precisely targeted ad campaigns that
associate context with consumer profiles.*
Community or social media sites like MySpace and Facebook offer
advertisers tightly targeted placements because they have extensive
* A top-of-the-line hotel can benefit from placing its ads in the travel pages of a newspaper only when
those pages are seen by readers with a high income. This can go a step further: A reader who regularly
visits the travel pages probably travels a lot. Airlines, travel agencies, and hotel chains can present
their offers as soon as that reader arrives at the home page of his or her favorite newspaper, even if
he or she is there to read a news article or check out the business section. These noncontextual ads
are often quite effective—people who frequent pages devoted to dieting or fashion are more likely to
click a targeted ad when they’re reading an article about something else. The ad topic interests them
just as much, but the ad isn’t competing with the article for their attention.
170 Chapter 15
and precise information on their user’s age, gender, location, and
interests. Advertisers don’t need to analyze profiles and contextual
impressions with a social media tool—users do that work already.
Whether they target small or large advertisers (like traditional
media) these players are favored by advertising professionals. Because
they make their living by selling research studies and producing ads,
these professionals use every opportunity to criticize the Google
model. Laura Desmond, director of MediaVest, the buying service
for Coca-Cola and Gillette, says that if Google and Yahoo! want to
sell ads for mass-market products and continue to increase advertising
sales, they will have to change their economic model. Why, these
critics argue, should major brands follow Google’s rules? Do they
need to accept the minimalist ads that bypass the talents of their
marketing departments and ad agencies? Why should they place ads
in the blogosphere, where customers go to praise (or, more likely,
criticize) their products?
Imagining the conversations between advertisers and their marketing
consultants is easy. The first camp demands tests of these new
media, whereas the second tries to dissuade the first camp with the
blend of arrogance and aggressiveness sometimes seen within their
ranks. The arguments become more heated as new agencies that
specialize in behavioral marketing and Internet research compete
with traditional ad agencies.
The debates become even more intense as managers of large
brands worry about diluting their advertising budget. The Méridien
hotel chain filed a lawsuit against Google for trademark infringement.
Méridien argued that when Internet surfers used Google to
search for Méridien, they were shown ads with links to the company’s
competitors. Companies around the world have continued this argument
with varied results: Axa, Louis Vuitton, and Bourse des Vols, a
travel agency, in France; Geico Insurance and the American Blind &
Wallpaper Factory in the United States; and metaspinner media in
Germany. Courts have also had to rule on companies’ complaints that
claimed a competitor had used their trademark to attract Internet
surfers to the competitor’s site by slipping the competitor’s name
into the HTML code to attract search engine hits.
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 171
For these plaintiffs the value of their brands is at stake, and the
best-known brands are worth a lot. For example, according to the
2008 rankings by Interbrand, the value of the Coca-Cola brand is
about $67 billion; Mercedes is worth $21 billion; and Apple and
Louis Vuitton are worth about $6 billion each.3 By allowing these
brand names to be used, Google risks allowing formerly clandestine
counterfeiters to publicize and enrich themselves at the expense of
their large corporate victims by using click fraud and spam.
Click Fraud and Spam
Click fraud, the practice of clicking an ad hundreds or thousands of
times to artificially increase the conversion rate, affects all advertisers
and could, several experts say, become Google’s Achilles’ heel.
Besides unscrupulous competitors, dissatisfied customers may use
bogus clicks in an attempt to exact revenge, or site owners might
generate fake clicks to boost their income from AdSense or a similar
program that pays the owners every time an Internet surfer clicks
ads displayed on the site.
According to companies specializing in auditing traffic quality,
fake clicks cost Internet advertisers hundreds of millions of dollars
and amount to about 15 percent of total clicks (advertisers surveyed
by Outsell estimate that 14.6 percent of the clicks they’re billed for are
fraudulent; according to Click Forensics, the average overall industry
click fraud rate was 16 percent for the third quarter of 2008).4
Google contests these figures, claiming they are greatly inflated.*
The techniques used by these third-party auditors to gather data are,
says Google, flawed. The auditors can’t track the problem accurately
because they don’t have the necessary data. Figures are obtained by
analyzing site visits, not by analyzing search engine data: Auditors
don’t have access to the impression data (how often an ad is viewed);
they don’t know the click-through rate for any given ad; and they
ignore the percentage of clicks that Google has eliminated as “invalid.”
They often count as fraudulent return visits to a site and a return to
a previous page or a reloaded page. In fact, as Alexander Tuzhilin,
* See, for instance, Andy Greenberg, “Counting Clicks,” Forbes.com (September 14, 2007): http://
www.forbes.com/2007/09/13/google-shuman-fraud-tech-cx_ag_0914google.html.
172 Chapter 15
author of an in-depth study on the subject, explains, nobody, neither
the search engines nor the advertisers, has the “comprehensive set
of data pertinent to detect invalid clicks.”5
Even if these figures are as exaggerated as Tuzhilin thinks and
as Google claims (saying that no more than 0.02 percent of clicks
are actually fraudulent), click fraud is a genuine threat that search
engine companies don’t take lightly—and it’s a huge threat to the
Internet economy. “Something has to be done about this really,
really quickly, because I think, potentially, it threatens our business
model,” said George Reyes, then Google’s chief financial officer, at
a meeting with financial analysts in December 2004.6 Other experts
share his opinion.
Some observers, however, like George Jansen, an academic who
studies these issues, argue that Google’s payment system allows
advertisers to compensate for click fraud. For example, if advertisers
estimate that 15 percent of clicks are fraudulent, they can simply
reduce their budget by that much. The scenario is an excessively
optimistic one shared by Eric Schmidt, who said at a 2006 Stanford
conference, “Eventually, the price that the advertiser is willing to pay
for the conversion will decline, because the advertiser will realize that
these are bad clicks; in other words, the value of the ad declines.” He
immediately added, however, “But because it is a bad thing, because
we don’t like it, because it does, at least for the short-term, create
some problems before the advertiser sees it, we go ahead and try to
detect it and eliminate it.”7
Obviously, Schmidt’s is the rational solution, especially because
Yahoo! and Microsoft, when confronted with the problem, chose
to address it and could use this as a competitive marketing ploy if
Google fails to act. In fact, Google pays refunds to advertisers victimized
by click fraud and has developed filters to subtract fraudulent
clicks from customer invoices. But that is not enough and might
even be counterproductive. After all, who knows if the filters work
correctly or if Google really refunds every fraud victim?*
* Google could also give advertisers the option of prohibiting their ads from appearing on specific
sites. Recently, it began to offer advertisements remunerated according to specific actions taken by
Internet users, called cost-per-action (CPA ). This is another way to fight fraud, although this method
runs the risk of turning the advertisers into cheaters.
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 173
Click fraud is only one aspect of a more general phenomenon
affecting the entire Internet: spam. The word spam was originally used
in this context to describe unwanted mass email, but the term is now
used to describe many types of phenomena; not all are fraudulent,
but all attempt to subvert the system. “Spam is an arms race,” says
Douglas Merrill, an ex-Googler, adding that fooling search engines
is a multimillion-dollar business.8
All spammers want to generate more hits and increase traffic
to their pages. Some try to cheat the algorithm that ranks natural
results in order to appear higher in search results. Others vie for a
better position for their ad in the right column on the page.
Search engine spammers use several techniques to mislead search
engines and their ad placement algorithms. The most common one
is to build links between pages for reasons other than merit. These
nepotistic links, as they are called, can be created by bombarding
blogs and discussion forums with comments about a site and posting
its link by soliciting outgoing links from other sites to decrease
a competitor’s ranking.* Google bombing, also called link bombing,
describes attempts by spammers to raise the ranking of their page
in Google’s search results by increasing the number of pages that
link to it, often by constructing link farms, dense networks of sites
with reciprocal links. Another technique, called cloaking, is used to
serve up a different page from those that the search engine “sees.”
For example, you search for information on “fertility among mosquitoes,”
and the search engine lists pages that, although they seem
to the algorithm to answer your question, in fact, promote Viagra
or Cialis.
The economic stakes are considerable. The success of these
techniques is directly related to the behavior of Internet users, who
typically read only the first page of results, if that much. Studies show
that users visit the sites at the top of the first page of search results
in 20 percent of searches and that they follow the ads at the top of
the advertising column 10 percent of the time. More surprisingly, if
* This technique was used politically in 2004 to downgrade an anti-Semitic site that came in at first
place on a search for the word Jew. Orchestrated by a journalist, the campaign asked Internet users to
create outgoing links from their sites to the Jew page on Wikipedia. The campaign took one month
(and 125,000 users) to achieve its desired goal. You can easily imagine how the same technique could
be used in a hotly contested election campaign.
174 Chapter 15
a site has both the top search position on the page and the top position
in the ad column, users will click one or the other 60 percent
of the time.* Needless to say, this phenomenon tempts spammers
to mislead the classification algorithm.
These techniques are used by individual spammers as well as by
consultants and individuals who offer their customers (including
many large websites) a service designed to get their customers’ sites
listed on the first page of results by beating the algorithms behind
PageRank. Unlike email spammers, their efforts to subvert search
are particularly pernicious because they are almost invisible. People
have learned how to recognize and protect themselves against email
spam reasonably well, but manipulated search results are harder to
recognize.
Search spam, which lowers the quality and reliability of search
results, must be fought vigorously because it also deprives legitimate
sites of the financial gains that derive from occupying a good
PageRank position. And when some sites are successfully cheating,
others are encouraged to cheat as well, which is a problem for
everyone.
One response would be for Google to move its advertising model
from cost-per-click to cost-per-action, wherein the advertiser would
pay only when a visitor performs some predetermined action. That
action might be reading a catalog, staying on the site for a certain
length of time, providing personal information, or making a purchase.
In fact, Google has adopted this scheme for large advertisers and
now offers them advertising positions that are charged by volume.
Because the primary challenge is to detect web spam, however,
the best solution will most likely be a technical one. Detection can
be performed by analyzing links or page content, but this presents
a difficult problem. In the absence of a definitive solution, search
engines are condemned to adopt what military theorists call a strategy
of maneuver in order to defeat their adversary, changing their algorithms
regularly to disorient and confuse the enemy.
* All viewers see the topmost results, but only 10 percent of visitors see the bottom results (ranked 10).
Fifty percent of visitors view the sponsored link at the top of the right column of the Google search
page; the last ad, however, is seen by only 10 percent according to Enquiro and Didit, Eye Tracking
Study, June 2005 (http://www.enquiroresearch.com/eyetracking-report.aspx).
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 175
But this tactic has its drawbacks: When a search engine changes
its ranking algorithm, it risks hurting honest site owners. And because
the algorithms are secret, this strategy can lead to suspicion that
Google might not be honest in its ranking. These criticisms are the
two most frequent ones leveled against the company.
Confidence and Privacy Concerns
Confidence and privacy concerns focus on the core of the company’s
business model. When advertisers criticize Google for not
giving them accurate information about the people who click their
ads, they bring up a touchy point. Google provides free search, and
users do not have to register. So users haven’t agreed to provide the
information that advertisers want. But that doesn’t mean Google
lacks information about its customers. On the contrary, it knows a
lot about them.
Google’s customer information mostly derives from its collection
of technical information through the use of cookies (small bits of
code that are written to your hard drive by websites you visit) and
server logs, which collect information using your machine’s Internet
address (IP number). Internet surfers are generally unaware that
this information, which is of tremendous value, is being collected.
Google can use the information to determine a visitor’s geographical
location, language, searches, and sites visited. Although this information
contains nothing personal (age, sex, income, street address,
or similar), it is actually pretty revealing.
As you search, search engines collect information about your
behavior, and the more you search, the easier you are to profile. To
get a sense of the power of this tracking information, imagine what
law enforcement officers might infer from a list of the pages queried
by a potential sex offender, terrorist, political activist, trade union
member, or music pirate.
According to Kurt Opsahl, a Senior Staff Attorney with the
Electronic Frontier Foundation (an organization that works to protect
civil liberties on the Internet), Google and other search engines maintain
“a massive database that reaches into the most intimate details
of your life: what you search for, what you read, what worries you,
what you enjoy. It’s critical to protect the privacy of this information
176 Chapter 15
so people feel free to use modern tools to find information without
the fear of Big Brother looking over their shoulder.”9
Big Brother? Well, yes, but Google argues that it needs this
information to give users high-quality results. Google will use a
searcher’s location (derived from his or her IP address) to tailor its
results so that, for example, a person searching for a bank in the
United Kingdom doesn’t find one in Australia. Or, if a user’s history
shows that he or she visits sociology or philosophy sites, Google
can tailor its results list to show sites of possible relevance to his or
her most frequent searches. Knowledge of user preferences is the
best way to reduce the imprecision that can slip into even the bestworded
queries.
But—and this is a big but—keeping track of everything an
individual says or does, including his or her opinions and decisions,
is an erosion of that person’s basic freedoms: the freedom to keep
secrets and change opinions. A person is entitled to the anonymity
that comes from personal data protection.
In response to these concerns, US authorities, persuaded by
strident pleas from the direct marketing industry,* have chosen to
focus on self-regulation to address this difficult issue. In comparison,
European countries have passed legislation, beginning with the 1995
publication of a directive by the European Union giving its citizens
statutory means to access their personal information, correct it,
control it, and prevent its use for commercial purposes.
This difference is strongly underscored by philosophical issues
concerning the role of the state and the objectives of personal data
protection. In Europe, data protection is a question of individual
dignity, whereas in the United States concern has focused on protecting
public access to information.10
As you might imagine, self-regulation hasn’t solved the problem,
although ways to browse anonymously are available. In fact, experts
rationalize why private data protection should disappear entirely in
a digital world. “Technology and privacy are on collision courses.
* The Direct Marketing Association has successfully opposed many proposed regulations, beginning
with an attempt to curb telemarketing in 1990—well before the development of the Internet as it’s
known today.
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 177
Technology makes [surveillance and tracking] cheap,” said Sun
founder Bill Joy at a public event. “The tip toward the public space
being made less private . . . is one that’s hard to fight.”11
Whether they are jurists, economists, or specialists in new technologies,
American professionals today are caught between the
market and the legal system.12 In essence, those who favor market
sanctions and the right to control personal information are revisiting
a problem discussed by Arthur R. Miller in his book The Assault on
Privacy, which was published in 1971.13 How, Miller asked, can we
prevent the concept of personal data ownership from leading to the
stifling of free expression? If I own information about myself, then
I can stop others—especially journalists—from using it in the same
way companies do when they legally attack consumers who criticize
them too strongly. Jessica Litman, a professor at the University of
Michigan Law School, adds, “One of the most facile and legalistic
approaches to safeguarding privacy that has been offered to date is
the notion that personal information is a species of property. If this
premise is accepted, the natural corollary is that a data subject has
the right to control information about himself and is eligible for the
full range of legal protection that attaches to property ownership.”14
Those who argue for judicial recourse think in terms of monetary
damages. They want court actions restricted only to information
whose misuse causes harm. But this opens the door to countless
court cases like the one pursued by Ashley Cole, an Arsenal soccer
player, who sued Google for linking his name to online news articles
that implied he was bisexual.
This issue is critical for Google because it concerns the confidence
placed in the company by its users, the loyalty of its advertising customers,
and the development of some of its most promising markets.
Consider Internet applications for mobile phones. They present
a major growth opportunity for Google because there are infinitely
more mobile phones than computers, particularly in developing
countries where almost everybody carries one. But mobile phone
applications imply an increased confidence in the service provider
because phones are used to access private data (diary, calendar, and
notes, among others) stored on the service provider’s servers. The
same applies to services that allow marketers to collect personal
178 Chapter 15
data and track a user’s whereabouts (based on searches for nearby
restaurants, gas stations, pharmacies, and so on).
Healthcare information is another area that could impact Google’s
growth considerably. Each day, 7 percent of Internet users, or about
8 million American adults, search online for information about
symptoms or a particular disease, to confirm a diagnosis, and so on.15
Ensuring that the quality of the answers is definitive will require the
development of a vertical solution similar to ones that Google has
already developed to search academic resources (Google Scholar),
patents (Google Patents), and programming code (Google Code),
along with attendant utilities for reading the answers.
But again, the question of trust arises: The information that
people search for when inquiring about their health reveals both their
concerns and their personal health issues. Few, if any of us, would
want our employers, the government, or a life or health insurance
company to have access to this type of information unnecessarily.
Will Google keep this information secure?
Google’s long-term success will largely depend on how much
trust its most demanding users place in it. This trust is all the more
vital because Google’s services are free; nothing prevents users from
switching search engines and moving to a competitor.
Confidence is fragile and, as Google’s leaders know, can quickly
disappear if customers think their information is being exploited
for the wrong reasons. To that end, in March of 2007, Google
announced it would no longer store information indefinitely, stating
“Unless we’re legally required to retain log data for longer, we will
anonymize our server logs after a limited period of time.”16 The blog
post further stated, “We will continue to keep server logs dated (so
that we can gradually improve Google’s services and protect them
from security and other misuse), but will make this data much more
anonymous, so that it can no longer be identified with individual
users, after 18–24 months.”
Personal data protection is a sensitive matter in the United States
and around the world, and breaches have ramifications. Yahoo! was
sued for giving the Chinese police information on dissidents that led
to their imprisonment.17 But this question is also a sensitive one for
governments themselves, who worry about important data stored
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 179
in a foreign country. You don’t have to be a conspiracy theorist to
believe that the use of data collected by search engines can be sensitive;
a simple query of public information databases already reveals
quite a bit about organizations that are theoretically secretive—like
the Central Intelligence Agency.
If governments decide to support the development of national
search engines in Saudi Arabia, India, and Japan, as they have in
Europe and the People’s Republic of China, it won’t be by accident.
Governments are well aware that putting all the world’s knowledge
in the hands of an overseas company is, to put it mildly, imprudent.
The United States is largely uninterested in regulating the Internet
except for “good” reasons—to suppress pornography, pedophilia,
and terrorism. But who knows whether that philosophy will change
someday. Can Europeans, Japanese, or Chinese accept the notion
that their researchers, strategists, and managers—all of whom use
search engines regularly in their work—are at the mercy of a foreign
power?
Google’s dilemma is one of how to store the data it needs to
improve the quality of its search results without betraying user trust.
Its first solution is to purge regularly from its databases information
that is no longer useful. The more vigorous defenders of privacy say
this is not enough, however.
Another solution might be to have visitors opt in to allow Google
to store their information, as it does with Web History. Web History
Can the Internet Reveal Classified CIA Information?
Experts at a British computer security company wondered how much
information on the CIA, its programs, its installations, and its personnel
was available in public databases.18 Their fishing expedition was little
short of miraculous. They could retrieve confidential phone numbers,
secret site addresses, the site map of the internal network, domain names,
servers, and the software programs on the CIA’s computer system—
ten pages of information that “The Company,” as the agency is often
called, would surely prefer to keep secret if only to avoid revealing its
vulnerabilities to the whole world. Yet the information was all obtained
legally, following British and US laws. You can only speculate about
what information more devious, less law-abiding individuals might
obtain from the records Google maintains about each of us.
180 Chapter 15
allows you to find sites you’ve visited and build lists of bookmarks
with just a mouse click, and when you sign up for the service, you
give Google permission to track your web activity. The same is true
of all Google applications, including your Google Account, Chrome
(the Google browser), Google Docs, Gmail, iGoogle, and so on.
Will Copyright Concerns Slow Google’s Growth?
Online delivery of film, video, and television are some of Google’s
most promising areas for growth and advertising sales. But like other
companies interested in these emerging markets, Google has been
confronted with a problem: copyright. Google can’t simply take this
content and deliver it without permission.
Finding a way around this obstacle, as Dailymotion, YouTube,
and others did when they began hosting and streaming content
produced by users, is possible. Coupled with the rise of cheap digital
cameras and camcorders, these sites gave rise to an activity that might
otherwise have remained marginal, at the same time opening a video
market that few had suspected existed—one so large that within a
few months, hundreds of thousands of videos were available online.
But this solution does not solve the problem of how to offer
Internet access to copyrighted content. Hosting and search are two
different activities. Whereas a search engine cannot be held liable for
a document shown on its results pages (because it is only announcing
the document’s existence and providing a way to access it), hosting
services are responsible for what they keep on their servers. This means
that hosting services need to classify content, enforce rules, and refuse
material that might invite lawsuits—whether that’s pornography
(which aficionados can find on specialized sites) or any material that
might infringe copyrights, especially those belonging to big media
conglomerates. The confusion between these two businesses can
also lead a search engine to favor the content it hosts over content
hosted elsewhere (as Google does when providing links to only the
videos on its servers and those on YouTube—a policy that impacts
the quality of results). A producer who wants the largest possible
distribution will naturally be tempted to upload his or her video to
multiple hosts, but this wastes his or her time and also degrades the
results found on the few universal search engines.
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 181
But let’s return to copyright and to the international laws that
protect intellectual property—laws designed to give creators exclusive
rights to their creations, protection against counterfeiters, and
assurance of payment for their work, thereby providing an incentive
to produce new artistic and commercial work. These laws were
designed for and by an economy in which producing and distributing
creative work was expensive. In that context, publishers, producers,
booksellers, theater owners, broadcasters, and record distributors
managed to control the major share of revenue from the sale and
distribution of creative works—so they had a lot to lose with the
arrival of digital technologies that limit the value or render useless
many of their services. Today, almost anyone can publish a book or
music online at almost no cost.
These mechanisms have to be reevaluated. The justification for
protecting investments made by producers and editors makes less
sense now that those costs have decreased. Why should Internet surfers
pay the same price for a song, a book, or a film when the costs
of production and distribution are virtually eliminated? A computer
file is neither a disc nor a book. Paying for a recording medium or
for the expenses of traditional distribution (including real estate
or personnel) are no longer needed. The explosion of free amateur
videos online has lessened the weight of the principal argument of
copyright advocates—that artists wouldn’t create new works without
a system of copyright protection.
As long as these laws remain intact (and no indication exists that
they will change quickly), Google will find it difficult to become
the main gateway for the dissemination of copyrighted video and
music. In 2007, only 39 percent of US Internet users employed a
search engine to find videos.19 By putting up obstacles to searchengine
growth on video markets, copyright laws have given others
an opportunity to enter this market.
Hulu, a joint venture of NBC Universal and News Corp, is a good
example. Launched for public access in March 2008, eight months
later Hulu had more than 206 million streams and 9 million viewers.20
And Hulu could charge for all its videos when YouTube, the Google
property, could only monetize 4 percent of its content.21 The situation
would change if copyright holders agreed to share advertising
182 Chapter 15
revenue, but that is only likely to happen if Google can guarantee
them either higher revenues than they can expect from hosting the
content on their own sites or significant additional revenues that
won’t cannibalize their own sales. In order to achieve revenue levels
while offering visitors free access to content (paid for by advertising),
Google will need to develop technology to index videos and
insert contextual commercials that are more efficient than standard
embedded TV commercials.* Until these technical innovations are
underway, Google will have to make do with income from amateur
videos, unless the company adopts a more classical economic model,
like iTunes, where consumers pay for what they get.
Cultural Globalization and Resistance
In international markets Google might run into another obstacle:
cultural resistance. Criticisms of Google and Yahoo! over censorship
in the People’s Republic of China were intense, and Google’s leaders
have since regretted their decision. From the beginning, Google
has positioned itself as a totally international product, able to serve
those who speak many different languages. Of course, saying they
can’t do it would be ridiculous, but how well can they really do this?
For each individual, language is part of his or her cultural capital,
but American search engines don’t treat languages equally. You hear
all about the digital divide between those who are fully immersed in
technology and those without access to it, but another, less obvious
division exists between speakers of the languages search engines handle
well and those they handle poorly. As you might guess, languages
with non-English characters, such as Arabic, Chinese, Japanese,
and Korean, present difficulties, and competitors have appeared in
those countries.
Similar problems occur with languages that use the English
alphabet such as French. Consider the two French words loue and
loué. The first is a form of the verbs “to rent” and “to praise”; the
second is at once the past tense of the same verbs and the name of a
* Several solutions are being considered, one of which consists of encouraging Internet surfers to add
captions to their videos with tools provided by the host. The most sophisticated tools are based on
analysis and transcriptions of the sound tracks of video files; analysis of the images themselves appears
to be in the distant future.
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 183
region in Bresse famous for its poultry. As of this writing, the French
version of Google doesn’t differentiate between these two words, so
entering either word will produce answers about renting an apartment,
about praise, and about poultry. Slavic and Semitic languages
have similar problems that lead to confusing and less useful results
than you might expect.
Of course, these details will eventually be remedied, but they
demonstrate a limitation of search engines in an environment in
which English is spoken by only a portion of Internet users.
These weaknesses in the current global versions of the Google
search engine have led to the development of competing regional
products like Baidu, which has taken the lead in the Chinese market,
and Yandex, which serves almost half of searches carried out in
Russia, compared to Google’s 33 percent share.22
Competing search engines may also be able to play on fears of
cultural domination, which have emerged not only in Europe but
also in Asia (especially China) and the Middle East. In 2006, France
and Germany launched a European search engine called Quaero.
Although it elicited many smirks in the United States, where it was
immediately dubbed the “Google Killer,” it has yet to be successful
(in fact, as of this writing, it seems pretty dead), but its launch speaks
to this concern about cultural hegemony. Around the same time and
for the same reasons, Saudi Arabia announced its intent to cooperate
with Germany in the development of Sawafi, an Arabic search
engine. According to one expert, the initiative was made because
“the number of home pages in Arabic accounts for only 0.2 percent
of the total, while approximately 65 percent of Arab Net surfers do
not read English and cannot read the English pages that represent
more than 70 percent of the total.”23 The engine was never launched,
but once again, the reasons behind this project did not disappear:
Arabic culture is still not as prevalent as it should be on the Web.
Japan and India have also begun their own search initiatives. And
in China, Baidu has long called itself the search engine that “knows
Chinese best.” Its TV commercials spoof a westerner with a big nose
who thinks he knows everything but actually knows little if anything
about the Chinese-speaking world. Baidu, a private company that
benefits from official government support, has played the culture
184 Chapter 15
card and launched a “research center of cultural classics from before
the Qin dynasty through the end of the Qin dynasty” in addition
to an “open Chinese encyclopedia.” As the People’s Daily newspaper
stated, “It is natural that the Internet was transformed into a cultural
battlefield, and that cultural confrontations are felt more strongly
there. In the era of the Internet, we need to defend our traditions,
develop our technology, and confirm our presence.”24
That says it all. American domination of the Internet amounts to
a complete remapping of the cultural and intellectual landscape. Not
only is English the dominant language online, but English-speaking
culture imposes its references and values. This is demonstrated,
among many other indicators, by the ranking of Shakespeare in
Google queries—far ahead of Dante, Racine, or Goethe.
A query of Google Book Search produces similar results. Does
this indicate that search engines are agents of English imperialism? Of
course not. These results simply demonstrate that English-speaking
culture is (as of now) better served by the Internet than other cultures
and that Google and other search engines present access to an
unintentionally truncated and skewed culture.
Several factors contribute to this state of affairs. For one, the
PageRank mechanism, which sorts documents according to the number
and quality of links that point to them, puts those documents that
attract the most attention at the top of the first page (as mentioned
previously, the only place most Internet users look). Because English
is used more than other European languages, the English documents
show up at the top of results pages because they generate more hits
Rankings for some of the most famous European writers on Google Trends
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 185
than those written in other languages, which appear farther down
the list. Thus, if I search for Goethe on Google.fr, I will find English
documents before I find German ones.
This trend can only worsen because authors who want to be
read may find it beneficial to use English rather than their native
language. The phenomenon is a classic one, known as ousting or
crowding out : The dominant language and culture tends to marginalize
minority languages and cultures.* This phenomenon pervades
the Internet. Copyright restrictions eliminate many works that are
not accessible online, and if you can’t read the text you want, you’ll
most likely turn to whatever is immediately accessible.
Corporate Data: A Comeback for Microsoft?
Another promising area of growth, enterprise search, is the searching
of corporate intranets and file servers. Google’s entrees into this
area, Google Enterprise and the Google Search Appliance, would
appear to pose no copyright problems and should not face cultural
resistance, though they raise confidentiality issues. This area, however,
highlights another obstacle to Google’s growth: competition.
The competition is fierce in enterprise search, especially from
Yahoo!’s OmniFind (in partnership with IBM) and Microsoft’s
Enterprise Search. Although as of this writing Microsoft holds only
a pitiable third place in search (well under 9 percent, according to
comScore.com), far behind Yahoo! (around 20 percent) and way
behind Google (over 60 percent), considering the game is over
would be a mistake.
Microsoft has many assets, not least of which is financial. Every
year, they invest billions in research and development (R&D) alone.
* Entire aspects of world culture are never presented to the typical Internet surfer, so the fact that
members of those cultures try to defend themselves is understandable. The solution would surely
be a high-quality machine translator that can leap across linguistic borders, but obviously, that is a
long way down the road. This phenomenon can have unexpected consequences, however—in the
scientific disciplines, a curious reversal has resulted. In the past, working papers of scholarly articles
were circulated only within the academic community, but today, anyone can read them on the Web.
These working papers have become a more important source of information than the final articles
that are published, after approval by peer review panels, in journals reserved for people with access
to large university libraries.
186 Chapter 15
While Microsoft has a very broad range of products that require
considerable R&D, and like all large companies, it probably devotes
a significant part of its budget to projects that will never get off the
ground, the company still has a huge war chest.
Microsoft’s second asset is its monopoly position. As an editor
at The Economist pointed out, one can spend a day without using
Google or any other search engine, but not using a Microsoft product
is, for most us, impossible.
A third asset is Microsoft’s determination. As Bill Gates enviously
said in an interview, “Well, I have a meeting today with our
people doing search. And that’s an area where Google has got out in
front, does a very good job. We’re sort of the David vs. Goliath in
that [chuckles] particular battle so we’ll have fun talking to them
about their progress.”25 Microsoft’s leaders have never backed down
from a contest. Many remember how they eliminated Netscape with
Internet Explorer. Some think this matchup could be a repeat.
Google’s domination of the enterprise search market is not a done
deal. Microsoft knows more about business computing than Google,
which could be an advantage. “Enterprise search is our business, it’s
our house and Google is not going to take that business,” said Kevin
Turner, chief operating officer of Microsoft.26 Competition will be
all the more intense because this market is large (Steve Ballmer,
president of Microsoft, valued it at $13 billion). Dave Girouard,
enterprise general manager at Google, readily acknowledges that
nobody is ahead in this field.
Obviously, Google doesn’t lack assets. Google has far more
resources than Netscape had, not to mention the experience of
employees and associates who worked for Netscape. It has a considerable
lead in advertising and document management and more
expertise in these areas than Microsoft. Also, Google has already
signed agreements with some key players in business intelligence,
like Cognos and Business Objects, that specialize in working with
corporate data. Dell, the leading American distributor of PCs,
supports Google, and so does Adobe; therefore, Google could benefit
from companies that resent Microsoft’s past bullying. But the battle
is only beginning, and it promises to be all the more intense because
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 187
corporate data processing is not a natural outgrowth of Google’s
business for these reasons:
• Most corporate data is stored in structured databases that current
crawlers cannot effectively query or in formats that search
engines don’t handle.
• Many corporate files expire quickly or are updated versions of
earlier documents.
• Corporate data is often dispersed among various machines, which
makes access more difficult.
• Most companies are hierarchical organizations that limit access
to information according to one’s role in the organization.
This brings to mind the problems encountered when searching
a PC for files stored on a hard drive. As most people will attest, the
results usually contain a lot of “noise.” Whoever can best solve this
problem will carry the day.
The technical stakes are complex. Both Google’s and MSN’s
search algorithms were designed for natural language queries of textual
databases, so whether they will be able to query the numerical
and formatted data found in traditional databases without making
significant changes is uncertain. The crawlers they use were designed
to index static pages, not dynamic ones that ask users to specify their
query terms in search forms.
What’s more, the thought process for enterprise search is somewhat
different. In a textual database, a user starts with concepts and
proceeds, through trial and error, by successive approximations. If the
user doesn’t find what he or she wants, the user modifies the query.
This strategy is not best suited for corporate searches that look for
precise data like a meeting date, an employee address, or regional sales
figures. Using an algorithm like Google’s will generate only noise.
But corporate data search is only a part of the story. The battle
will also move to office automation tools where Microsoft has a
monopoly and Google has ambition. The Google Docs Suite is
Google’s me-too Office product. Although rather mediocre when first
188 Chapter 15
released, Docs has evolved quickly and could become the standard
suite of web-based office automation tools. This emerging market
might also grow very quickly with the advent of cloud computing, in
which software is provided “as a service” via the Internet.
Net Neutrality
Google’s phenomenal growth has attracted many predators who want
a piece of the action. Perhaps most alarming—and most threatening
to Google—are the telecommunication companies that built the
Internet’s infrastructure. Without their telephone lines, the Web
would not have been possible, so they are asking for a place at the
table that they relinquished back in the mid-1990s. As long as the
market remained relatively small, the large network operators let
this go. After all, the Web brought them traffic. But now they want
to pick up a new hand and get back into the game.
Their ambition is pretty simple: to install a toll system so Google
and other major Internet players would have to pay to use their
high-speed lines. No one would be denied access, but those that
didn’t pay would have slower access. This would, of course, limit
the competition among content providers and give telephone and
cable companies the ability to control how the Internet is used (and
to discriminate among users).
Their principal argument is that they need to make major investments
in the networks needed for distributing large-scale, Internetbased
consumer services, like television, that require vast amounts
of bandwidth. Google, Microsoft, Yahoo!, and others that want the
Internet to remain “neutral” dispute their claims. If the telecom
companies get their way, all big Internet players would have to share
their advertising revenues with the “pipe merchants” to maintain a
high level of service. This would end the dream of open exchange
and would drastically change the Internet’s economic model.
From a consumer point of view, the battle is between free access
to all Internet content and network quality. When the Internet was
mainly used for emailing or reading text, the speed and quality of the
data stream was not a concern. That has all changed with the rise of
the World Wide Web and the advent of new online services delivering
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 189
music and video—services that demand a fast and uninterrupted
data stream.
Fundamentally, net neutrality is about equal access to the Internet.
As Eric Schmidt wrote in a letter to Google users in 2008, “The phone
and cable monopolies, who control almost all Internet access, want
the power to choose who gets access to high-speed lanes and whose
content gets seen first and fastest. They want to build a two-tiered
system and block the on-ramps for those who can’t pay.”27
The fight began on April 26, 2006, when the US House of
Representatives rejected an amendment to prohibit discriminatory
pricing for website suppliers. AT&T and Verizon scored an
early victory, but discussions began immediately on the Web and
in the blogosphere. Thousands of messages denounced the bill and
encouraged people to inform the news media, the public, and their
representatives. Self-proclaimed experts (some of whom really were
experts) posted documents online that were as professional as those
from any political PR agency.
This battle is extremely important, mixing economic principles
with corporate interests, and it poses a serious challenge to Google’s
profitability. The fight is being played out in the corridors of the
United States Congress and in quieter meetings of corporate boards
of directors. Telephone and cable companies have vast resources
and longstanding ties with legislators who aid them in their efforts
to advance their agendas. The debates will be long, difficult, and
highly technical, but these companies won’t escape the scrutiny of
informed public opinion.
One way to solve the problem might be to provide these operators
with a share of advertising revenue by paying for some of their
data assets, such as their customer base or the capabilities of their
sales networks. But regardless of the solution, the eventual resolution
is likely to decrease Google’s profit.
Management: Overcoming Complexity
Winning these different fights won’t be easy. But the principal challenges
could well come from within Google itself. The main challenge
is the business’s increasing complexity, which can’t be solved simply
190 Chapter 15
by hiring more staff. Google will also have to take the following
things into account:
• Greater market diversity
• A richer commercial offering
• An increasing overlap of economic, political, and technical issues
• Technical problems that are extremely difficult to solve, like
machine translation and the indexing of sounds and images
In 1955, Edith Penrose, an American economist (well known for
her contribution to the resource-based view of strategic management)
published a paper called “Limits to the Growth and Size of Firms”
in The American Economic Review.28 In this paper, she demonstrated
that complexity limited the growth of companies. Beyond a certain
point, she argued, executives no longer have sufficient cognitive
capacity to deal with the mass of information they need to manage
a company correctly. Furthermore, the availability or lack of top
managerial and technical talent acts as the bottleneck for a firm’s
growth rate because “the services that the firm’s resources will yield
depend on the capacities of the men using them.”
The history of corporate management tells us that the general
solution to this problem has been one of more organization.
Division of labor, specialization, the creation of multiple divisions,
and decentralization have all been adopted to facilitate the management
of more complex organizations. The question is, will Google’s
organizational model allow it to succeed, surrounded by these higher
levels of complexity?
I think so, for these reasons:
• The Google triumvirate of Page, Brin, and Schmidt multiplies
the cognitive capacities of the brain trust: Three leaders with
clear roles can process more data, more quickly, than one.
• The rapid information flow throughout Google encourages
teamwork, allows the organization to be reconfigured quickly,
and allows projects that are unlikely to succeed to be terminated.
Is Google’s Growth Sustainable? 191
• Google’s system of measurement provides engineers with direct
information on user behavior and allows them to make quick
and timely product development decisions. They don’t have to
wait for the results of marketing surveys or for instructions from
a central planner—two major roadblocks to growth in aging,
bureaucratic companies.
• Finally, Google’s Swiss Army knife approach to product development
has resulted in increasing numbers of new products
because developers don’t have to consider whether new products
will integrate with existing ones. This approach gives Google the
opportunity to test many new services simultaneously and, in
the long run, could help it to expand its overall business without
having to rely on only one service.
I’m not saying that Google can deal with every problem. The
innovation machine that is so effective for smaller projects is probably
not suited to solving the most complex problems like machine
translation and content-based automatic image or video indexing.
In this case, however, Google can hope that its strong relationship
with the academic community will compensate for what might
become a weakness.
Nor is it certain that Google’s model is best suited to resolving
the political problems that the company is likely to face, such as
anti-trust questions. Like the issue of net neutrality, an anti-trust
issue is more likely to be hashed out in Washington; engineers can’t
solve this problem.
On a more general note, can the company’s business model
itself hold up under sustained growth? Can the same methods that
proved so efficient in a company with 5,000 employees be used a
much larger company? Like most fast-growing companies, Google
will not escape increased bureaucracy. The key to its success will be
for Google to retain what made it a success in the first place: the
rapid movement of ideas and sharing of information among its users,
engineers, and leaders.

16
Can Google Evade Conformity?
Like all fast-growing startups, Google has learned
that the path of growth is littered with obstacles—
shareholders who want to impose conventional
management standards; customers, vendors, and
staffers who complain about what they perceive as
an anarchic atmosphere; executives stuck in the Peter
Principle mold (in a hierarchy, every employee tends
to rise to his level of incompetence); and obliging
managers who forget that yesterday’s victories don’t
194 Chapter 16
always herald tomorrow’s successes. None of these afflictions alone
is usually fatal, but in general, they lead companies astray from the
source of their originality and initial success. These are the risks of
falling into conformist management.
In this chapter, I’ll discuss some core issues that could affect
Google’s future, including pressure to limit free services, the temptation
to become more bureaucratic, the downside of the innovation
model, the development of class divisions among employees, and
the unintended consequences of Google’s compensation model.
The Danger of Free
Pressures for standardization come from all sides, and the company’s
economic model is the first target. Financial types regularly argue
the benefits of Google’s providing free services, whereas critics would
prefer to see diverse income sources. But Google also faces pressure
from unexpected skeptics, like Danny Sullivan, editor of Search
Engine Watch and a leading technology expert, who wants Google
to charge for its services for very different reasons. In a lampoon
called “25 Things I Hate About Google,” Sullivan pleaded with the
company to charge users for putting content on the Internet in order
to combat the rise of spam and noise:
Stop giving away Blogger for free. It’s just full of junk. Junk,
junk, junk. If you let anyone have it with no barriers, surprise,
some are going to take it and do bad things with it. .
. . Charge people even a token amount ($1 even), and that
will be a big barrier. Who’s going to ding you for charging a
$1 start-up fee that you can levy through Google Payments?
If you must give it away for free, find a better, more trusted
mechanism to partner with schools or others. Or make all
Blogger blogs banned from being spidered for the first 30
days and open them up after that upon review. If that’s not
perfect, then figure something else out. But do something.1
Outside pressure for Google to change its economic model may
be relatively discreet today, but this criticism is likely to become more
strident as the growth of Google’s revenues and benefits slows down.
What if, in response to these pressures, Google begins charging for
its free services?
Can Google Evade Conformity? 195
Recall from Chapter 14 that Google has an implicit pact with
its users. This symbiosis, as I’ve noted, has created a spirit of volunteerism.
Instead of complaining when a product is deficient, users
do everything they can to fix and improve it.
This paradigm has led to the growth of a network of partners
who develop applications based on Google tools—for free. Free is
the operative word behind so much of Google’s success. And while
prior to Google’s launch, you might have argued that the availability
of freely searchable information would lower the overall quality of
information on the Internet, with authors holding their best work
for the commercial sector, the exact opposite has proven true. Free
access has supported a profusion of quality information of all sorts.
Several mechanisms are at play, including people who want to
be published but can’t find a publisher, the desire to revive books or
articles that have “died” and become inaccessible because they are
out of print, and most important, the personal pleasure of expressing
opinions. In an article that deserves to be more widely disseminated,
the economist Albert Hirschman explains that expressing opinions is
in itself a source of well-being.2 By indexing the Web for free, search
engines have given everyone the opportunity to research, publish, and
disseminate their opinions, and that reward is what drives much of
Google’s success. Like the potlatch discussed in Chapter 2, Google’s
is a gift economy, and if Google begins charging for those gifts, it
risks breaking its own paradigm and losing its volunteers.
Still, providing free services has disadvantages. Beyond financial
criticisms and Danny Sullivan’s concerns about spam, if Google
continues to offer its services for free, it could be forced to ration
them, as it did with Gmail and Page Creator (a tool to help users
build their own websites).
Rationing resources can be done in several ways, including firstcome,
first-served, by geographical area, and by invitation only. Each
method has its advantages, but none is really satisfactory. Giving
preference to those who show up first favors the users who are best
informed and most loyal; sending out invitations supports the
development of a black market, as Google learned with the introduction
of Gmail. Before long, some users will become frustrated and
disappointed and consider switching to a similar product made by
196 Chapter 16
another company. Thus, rationing can facilitate the emergence of
competitors who are drawn into the market vacuum and can create
permanent disaffection among excluded customers.
By giving away services, Google also deprives itself of information.
As the Nobel Prize laureate Friedrich Hayek said, “The price
system [is] a mechanism for communicating information.”3 Prices
give buyers information about the relative availability and production
cost of items they want to buy while, at the same time, giving
sellers information on the extent to which consumers like a product
or find it useful. Without this information, the company needs
another way to determine consumer preferences. Communities of
highly motivated users and a well-developed measurement system
can mitigate this deficiency but may not entirely eliminate it.
This problem appeared when Google decided to remove some
of its services in early 2009 because, as a Google blog put it, they
were not “as popular as some of our other products.”4 But what does
that say? How do you measure the success of a free service? By the
number of users? Market share? You may subscribe to a newspaper
you don’t read every day simply because you want it to stay alive or
because you know you might need the information that it publishes
in the future. Use does not always convey information on usefulness:
People rarely use public pay-phones, but sometimes they need them.
The same could be true of some of Google’s products.
Free services might also present unforeseen problems. When
asked about the company’s growth, Eric Schmidt always cites three
factors: increases in traffic, increases in sales, and international
growth in Europe and Asia. When pressed further and asked which
of these factors propels growth, he says he doesn’t know—that’s
very complicated to figure out—but all factors are moving forward.
Then he adds that the areas with the greatest traffic increase are not
necessarily those where sales grow fastest. That seems to make sense,
but what will happen if traffic increases faster in Asia than in Europe
while advertising sales grow faster in Europe than in Asia? Will the
company subsidize Asian traffic with European income? Will it use
the differential in growth rates to smooth out variations in its different
markets? Or will it agree to act as a public utility in the smaller
advertising markets?
Can Google Evade Conformity? 197
Pressures to change Google’s economic model will remain weak
and divided as long as the company continues to earn money, but
they will become stronger if profits decrease. When they do, Google’s
co-founders should be careful not to kill what made it successful in
the first place.
I’ve already discussed the way that Google set up a two-tier
voting system when the company went public in order to resist
pressure from the financial markets. But with so many employee
stock options, the company will also have to contend with internal
pressures. If employees see their share value dropping because Google
is neglecting the financial markets, they might pressure their leaders
into conformism. The triumvirate may well prove particularly
effective in this case, because convincing three leaders will be much
more complicated than having to convince just one.
Organized Chaos and Bureaucratic Temptation
When companies grow, maintaining the informal lines of communication
that make small organizations so adaptable becomes more
difficult, and frail managerial hierarchies are easily overwhelmed. In
response, bottleneck procedures are installed to try to make things
run smoothly, but these procedures only limit a company’s responsiveness
and multiply burdensome administrative chores. Google is
not immune to this phenomenon, and some developers have already
begun to complain.*
Contractors who work for Google talk about anarchy, although
seasoned employees call it organized chaos, which is not all that different.
The lack of structural clarity seen in all fast-growing companies
is, at Google, worsened by the blur of responsibilities. The crossover
of employee skills and responsibilities may be highly effective for
product development, but it becomes counterproductive when
everyone has a say in everything.
Not knowing who is in charge of what, potential business
partners, customers, and users begin to address their communications
anywhere and everywhere. They clog the mailboxes of this
person and that indiscriminately, and the company risks missing
* See, for instance, Kevin J. Delaney, “Start-Ups Make Inroads with Google’s Workforce,” The Wall
Street Journal, June 28, 2007, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB118299113663550893.html.
198 Chapter 16
opportunities and deadlines. The absence of a lawyer to defend a
lawsuit in Belgium and the company’s failure to renew its German
domain name in early 2007 (which greatly amused the press) are
only two examples of the dysfunction within an organization that
has grown very quickly.
Rapid growth and size alone can also produce an environment
that supports cheating. Imagining how employees might abuse the
20 percent rule doesn’t take an expert. With few controls on their
activities, workers can easily take advantage of this perk and spend
more than 20 percent of their time on personal endeavors.
In fact, this appears to have already occurred. A study of working
time ordered by management shows that engineers generally
devote 30 percent of their time to personal projects. As a result,
Google could fall victim to the same disease that struck PARC during
the 1980s. The renowned Xerox research center invented the
modern human–machine interfaces, document transfer languages,
and several other breakthroughs, but none of these inventions was
useful to a photocopier manufacturer. Brilliant, yes, but useful to
the organization funding the work? No.
As with PARC, staff increases at Google will also increase the
number of research projects that won’t be integrated into the company’s
product line. So what will those engineers do with their pet
projects once they’ve been turned down and work is no fun any more?
If they have made a lot of money from their Google stock, maybe
they’ll go elsewhere to develop their applications and sell them back
to Google one day. That would be in keeping with an old Silicon
Valley tradition, but such a development would throw a little sand
in the gears of Google’s innovation machine.
Other potential risks with Google’s current design include effort
duplication and unproductive competition among teams—a situation
that often occurs in research laboratories. Although competition is
useful when it contributes to the progress of knowledge, it becomes
counterproductive when teams work on parallel projects. Like other
companies, Google can’t market two spreadsheets, three word processors,
or four mapping programs.
Growth naturally leads to the development of a denser, more
complex, more hierarchical organization with clearly defined lines
Can Google Evade Conformity? 199
of authority and more traditional processes of control. Technologybased
coordination at Google has delayed this progression toward
increased bureaucracy so far, but how much longer will that last?
Even technology-based coordination has proven to be effective
when used in an average-sized company. Will it continue to work
in one that employs several thousand people with branches around
the world? Is there a threshold beyond which this coordination will
become counterproductive?
When the Innovation Machine Sputters
Google’s systematic release of new products as beta versions keeps
things innovative and fresh and allows Google to outpace its competition.
But even the best things can come to an end. Leaving products
in beta for too long, especially if doing so results in Google’s keeping
decidedly mediocre products online, can be risky. Google might have
plenty of reasons for waiting to remove a weak beta product; after
all, if even a weak product satisfies a few hundred thousand users,
why improve or remove it?
By releasing early but not finishing products, Google tips its hand
to its competitors, revealing market needs and opportunities that
other companies will try to fill. As a result, Google loses a competitive
advantage and strengthens the competition. Still another very
significant risk is that too many mediocre, unfinished products risk
diluting Google’s core of exceptional products, thus lowering its
reputation and market penetration. Instead of securing a dominant
position in each niche, Google could end up with a fragmented
product line that distracts from the core business. Companies have
finite resources, and when launching a new product, a company
risks neglecting its existing products.
And let’s not forget that Google is not invincible. As the sample
statistics in the following table show (compiled in 2008 by Internet
market experts), Google does not dominate all web markets.
As with all statistical data, caution is advisable here; there’s no
telling how accurate these percentages are. The methods used by
Hitwise or comScore are not necessarily scientific, and other studies
might give different results.
200 Chapter 16
Market Share of Internet Services
Internet Service Product US Market Share
Email services
(Source: Hitwise,
February 2008)
Yahoo! Mail 54.63%
Windows Live Mail 22.54%
Gmail 5.51%
Search engines Google 65.98%
Yahoo! Search 20.94%
MSNBC 6.90%
Maps
(Source: Hitwise,
January 2008)
MapQuest 50.25%
Google Maps 22.20%
Yahoo! Maps 13.34%
Video
(Source: comScore,
July 2008)
Google Sites 44.0%
Fox Interactive Media 3.9%
Yahoo! Sites 2.5%
Sources: Hitwise and comScore, 2008
Granted, the value of the competing products shown in the table
aren’t equal, and each grouping is at different stages in its lifecycle.
Still, as this data shows, Google is not without competition—and
very strong competition in certain markets.
Products That Work Are Sticky
One challenge that Google will continue to face in the Internet
world is that products are sticky, especially when they get the job
done reasonably well. Customers tend to continue using familiar
products even when a new, better product comes along. Being first
to market pays, even if first isn’t always best. If someone has been
using MapQuest for years, or even Yahoo! Maps for that matter,
that person is likely to visit his old, familiar service when looking
for directions. The tried and true is safe and easy, and people don’t
always want to put the additional effort into using a new tool like
Google Maps, even if the tool is more powerful than its competitors.
Video and mapping products might escape this problem because
users access them through a search engine, but the problem might
prove to be much more complex for social media, networking sites,
blogs, and webmail. For example, although many consider Gmail
Can Google Evade Conformity? 201
to be a more powerful webmail client than Windows Live Hotmail,
Google has been unable to dislodge Hotmail. Inertia is certainly at
work, but so is practicality: People are reluctant to change an email
address because they don’t want to bother informing everyone they
know and the companies they do business with.
Note This resilience of inferior earlier technologies is no surprise.
Anyone interested in innovation realized a long time ago that
the best product doesn’t always win, as Apple’s fans know only
too well. Economists have written a lot on the subject ever since
they noticed that the QWERTY keyboard was not the best one
available.5
Finally, and most troubling for Google, these statistics are a
reminder that the Swiss Army knife approach to product development
does not guarantee success. As far as I can tell, Google’s domination
of the search market doesn’t ensure market domination in other
areas. Yes, the Google brand is extremely powerful, but branding
alone won’t make customers change products.
In this sense, Google is in a far less favorable position than
Microsoft, which over the years has learned how to “trap” its customers
Approach Web Statistics with Caution
Several companies specialize in analyzing online market share, such
as Alexa, comScore, Nielsen Net Ratings, and Hitwise. The data used
for their analysis is typically collected from user panels or ISPs. Each
method gives different results and comparing one study to the other is
hard because each panel’s size and composition varies from one company
to the other. Getting precise information on the methodology used in
each study is difficult, and in addition, the techniques used to build
these panels rarely prevent bias. Additionally, geographical factors are
often ignored. This latter point is significant because some products
are popular in one market but not in another. For example, Orkut,
Google’s social networking product, although relatively unpopular in
the United States, is very well established in Brazil and Asia. For these
reasons, approach statistics about the Web and its uses with caution. The
statistics certainly suggest trends, but their accuracy can be questionable.
202 Chapter 16
into using multiple Microsoft products whether because of product
integration or because customers like that familiar Microsoft interface.
Microsoft excels in this area and is not shy about exerting its
dominance. Google seems reluctant to use its power in the same
way—a fact that many find appealing but one that may hinder the
company’s ability to compete as effectively in many areas. Google’s
Swiss Army knife approach to product development is unique, but
this approach also has a strategic downside: It prevents Google from
using a dominant market position to lead in other markets. Is that
a flaw? Maybe for Google shareholders it is, but certainly not for
champions of free market competition.
Human Resources: The Other Side of the Coin
Google’s approach to human resource management has contributed
greatly to its ability to attract and keep high-quality staff in an
industry that experiences extremely high turnover (often more than
20 percent a year). But will its HR model last?
Google faces two risks that must be watched more closely: the
risk of creating a caste system within the company and the risk
linked to the unintended consequences of Google’s compensation
policy. I mentioned previously that engineers can devote 20 percent
of their time to personal projects but sometimes use more. This
attractive perk is reserved for engineers exclusively—and for good
reason. Administrative or sales personnel would have a difficult
time developing personal projects that would interest the company
or the industry.
Google’s founders were also liberal about issuing stock options
to their early employees since the company couldn’t pay competitive
salaries then. Many of these early employees quickly became
multimillionaires. Those who were hired later didn’t get the same
opportunity. Add in the fact that the company relies heavily on
subcontractors and temps, and you can foresee an emerging caste
system. Organizations of this type exist in they world, and they generally
function without too many clashes. Hospitals follow the same
model with classifications for doctors, nurses, and administrative
staff. Administrators don’t care for patients, and nurses rarely become
doctors. So a caste system can endure in a hospital without creating
Can Google Evade Conformity? 203
problems. One main difference though is that hospital employees
know what to expect. Hospitals have been around for a long time,
and the class system that exists is well known and generally accepted.
But Google has not been around for a long time, and preventing
conflicts from arising among spoiled engineers and administrators or
salespeople who don’t enjoy the same advantages could prove difficult.
All employees are under heavy pressure to perform, but they don’t
all get the same privileges. As long as the company enjoys continued
success, these frustrations will be of little importance, but tensions
are more likely to build during difficult times (see Chapter 17 for
more discussion of this).
To remedy some of these problems, in 2007 Google implemented
a transferable stock option (TSO) program that allows employees to sell
vested options in an online auction. The TSO gives employees a way
to better control their total compensation, diversify their assets, and
reduce the uncertainty of their stock options. By making employees
a bit less sensitive to Google’s share price, management may also be
able to prevent employees from joining with shareholders to pressure
management when it makes decisions that don’t please the markets.
Google’s ranks of millionaires (and billionaires, as shown in the
following table) may also become another source of dissent and class
division. Since companies have integrated stock options and share
distributions into their employment packages, some top executives
have become so rich that many consider it obscene. In the case
of Google, this enrichment has grown to unusual proportions.
For example, in February 2005, Wayne Rosing, David Drumond,
George Reyes, Jonathan Rosenberg, Omid Kordestani, and others
each made tens of millions of dollars by selling shares. Since then,
most have added to those windfalls. Not a month goes by without
someone selling his or her shares. By the end of this same year,
Google employees had sold shares worth some $3 billion. That’s a
lot of wealth for a select group of employees.
Yes, I know these are legitimate earnings. The distribution of
stock options to upper-level employees is nearly universal in the
United States today. Of the top 500 American companies, 94 percent
distribute stock to their executives, which counts for about
half of their total remuneration. Those selling stock options today
204 Chapter 16
were there at the beginning, and they worked hard. They’re happy
to benefit from the company’s generous policies toward its original
employees. We can, however, wonder about the consequences of
these massive sales (see the following table).
Stock Sales from July 2004 through January 2009
Employee Money Earned from Stock Option Sales
Sergey Brin $2,232,493,974
Lawrence Page $2,192,202,709
Eric Schmidt $1,684,288,451
Omid Kordestani $1,337,070,606
John Doerr $848,925,221
Source: Sec Form 4 6
The distribution of huge blocks of shares has always posed a
problem for economists concerned about the proper functioning
of the stock exchange. Not that they’re hostile to this distribution.
On the contrary, they are sensitive to the arguments of those who see
this as a way to reward top executives and encourage them to make
decisions that benefit shareholders (although this argument may be
losing favor, given the market today). The reasoning is simple: These
managers will be concerned about the interests of the company’s
“owners” because they are owners with a large vested interest.
But economists also see risks. How do you prevent employees
from making profits by using their knowledge of the company—
including its development projects and its weaknesses—to grow
rich at the expense of other less-informed shareholders? Imagining
the foul plays unscrupulous leaders could devise is not hard. As one
example, all they need to do is to sell their shares the day before the
announcement of poor results to profit at the expense of investors
who don’t have this same information. Of course, insider trading is
illegal in all developed countries. To prevent it without prohibiting
stock options, American and European stock exchange authorities
require that employees submit a disclosure statement whenever they
sell shares in the company they work for. They must state in advance
the numbers of shares, dates, and possibly the minimum price per
share required for the sale.
Can Google Evade Conformity? 205
This requirement was devised by American stock exchange
authorities to avoid cheating, but how effective is it? Does it prevent
corporate leaders from repeating the rapacious swindles that
have caused so many scandals? According to Alan D. Jagolinzer,
an economist at Stanford University who analyzed actual sales by
employees at 180 companies from 2001 to 2003, sales of stock
options were concentrated within the most favorable periods, and
stock performances were mostly better than they should have been.7
Changing dates and sales volumes might be difficult, but nothing
prevents executives from manipulating corporate communications.
So a CEO who already announced the sale of a large block of stock
on May 15 can set up an announcement that is designed to increase
the stock price a few days before the date.
An analysis of stock sales by Google leaders doesn’t indicate any
manipulations of this sort, even if the sales were concentrated on
the most favorable days of the month. But beyond the possibility
of cheating, unloading stock options at this rate is surprising. The
volume of these sales is so large that concern about their cumulative
impact on the markets is valid. When some 8 percent of a company’s
total worth changes hands within a few months, could that depress
the stock price? And if that were the case, wouldn’t the external
shareholders have a right to protest? Many observers saw a signal of
doubt here: If the top executives sell the stocks they hold, maybe
they are wary of the company’s ability to sustain the same rate of
growth. So these sales might send negative signals to the market.
Looking more closely, however, these sales are less surprising than
they might appear at first glance. The early sale of stock options to
take profits is currently a common practice among managers. The
same people who swear by taking risks when making decisions for the
company avoid those risks when it comes to their personal welfare.
This is sound thinking: They don’t want to put all their investments
into one company. Their financial advisors recommend diversifying
their assets. But psychological factors also come into play. Do
they know the company better and see its limitations? Employees
are usually more sensitive than investors to the company’s risks and
vulnerabilities. They often underestimate the value of stock options
and cash them in instead of taking money out of a savings account.
206 Chapter 16
Companies don’t take offense at this; they put up with it and see it
as a way to anticipate when an employee is planning to leave.
I should add that these sales don’t modify the balance of power
within the board of directors. At the outset, Sergey Brin and Larry
Page got shares with multiple voting rights that guaranteed their
control of the company. This mechanism allows them to sell large
stock volumes without losing any influence.
These stock sales could even be rationalized as being useful. Stock
options motivate leaders to make decisions that will excite shareholders
and make them feel that everything is being done to ensure
growth and share price increases. In fact, authors who have examined
this form of remuneration in detail have shown that managers with
most of their personal capital invested in the company they work
for tend to behave cautiously; they don’t want to lose everything
in a lawsuit filed by irate stockholders. In this context, the sale of
option shares can be good for the company, its shareholders, and its
employees. By sheltering part of a young fortune from the fluctuations
of stock market prices, a leader relieves himself or herself of
market pressures. The leader can take more risks since he or she has
less to lose; the leader can also invest for the long term since his or
her own future is already assured.
Although these massive sales don’t present every concern that
has been raised, others do exist. For one, when employees get rich,
behavior quickly changes, including the behavior of those who
have become rich and those who haven’t. Motivation may suffer,
and whereas complacency and arrogance among some may arise,
jealousy and resentment may arise in others. Conflicts of interest
can also occur. Once you own a dream mansion, the latest Ferrari,
a second home, and maybe a private jet (as Eric Schmidt does),
you need to find something to do with your money. Many donate
to charitable organizations; others invest in startups, becoming
business angels. But conflicts of interest might arise when a former
employee funds a startup whose business competes directly with
one of Google’s business activities—a risk that increases as Google
expands its business lines.
Can Google Evade Conformity? 207
Aside from that, how can you avoid abuses? Investing in a startup
is a little like playing poker. With luck, you might win a lot; with
less luck, you might lose everything. Even if you are financially
set for the rest of your life, losing is never fun. Might one of these
business angels be tempted to recycle one of the companies he or
she financed by selling it to Google at a highly inflated price? Who
knows if they can all resist the temptation?
Pressure from shareholders and partners, dysfunction, corruption,
and the aging of people and organizations are powerful forces that
drive companies to conform and normalize the original model that
worked so well. Google is not immune to these forces, but it benefits
from counterforces as well. I have cited the executive triumvirate
and technology-based coordination as two examples. To that I add
a third: the mechanism of reputation-based control. As long as these
three mechanisms remain in place, Google’s model will endure. The
model will evolve and change to better meet the constraints of a
more demanding environment, but it will persist.
Of course, things would be different if one of these three pillars
were to suddenly collapse. The company would then be condemned to
drift toward a hierarchical bureaucratic model with its superimposed
layers of managers and the systems of rigid control and planning
found at all large companies.

17
A Look Ahead
As I write this chapter, we are in the midst of a
global economic crisis that, since mid-2008, has
dramatically affected the economies of all developed
countries. These unusual economic circumstances,
not seen in recent memory, provide an opportunity
to question the strength of the Google model and
its ability to weather an economic recession.
Many people remember the economic downturns
of the early 1990s and early 2000s, but since
210 Chapter 17
the 1930s and the Great Depression, many other recessions have
occurred. The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER),
which keeps track of such economic events, has identified a dozen
recessions in the United States alone. These crises are more or less
serious and deep, but all share certain traits. Specifically, they do
the following:
• Destroy corporate value through a sharp fall in share prices
• Cause less competitive companies to disappear
• Lead to reduced spending on activities that do not promise
immediate return, such as advertising, marketing, and R&D
• Cause companies to restructure in order to seek productivity gains
• Result in the adoption of defensive strategies such as price reductions,
which ultimately weaken the most vulnerable companies
In long crises, these manifestations become self-fulfilling: Cuts in
spending and layoffs contribute to massive unemployment and lower
prices that undermine business. And last but not least, these crises
give rise to what Joseph Alois Schumpeter, an Austrian economist
famous for his analysis of business cycles, calls a “process of creative
destruction,” in which old ways of doing things are destroyed and
replaced by new technologies and management methods.1
Not surprisingly, the longer an economic crisis lasts, the greater
its effects. After a recession, the economic landscape is generally very
different from what it was before, and we have no reason to expect
that things will be any different this time. Some companies will
disappear, others will rise to new heights, and several markets will
change radically. These changes will be true not only of the automotive
and financial industries but also of advertising and retail, two
markets of direct importance for Google.
This chapter will assess the current recession’s potential impact on
Google. First, I’ll examine the recession’s impact on Google’s business
environment and new opportunities. Next, I’ll examine the impact
of the measures that Google has begun to take in response to this
crisis as I explore questions such as whether Google will change its
management model (and if does, how) and whether the recession
A Look Ahead 211
will solve the business problems generated by Google’s rapid growth
before the crisis occurred. Finally, I’ll examine whether Google’s
unique managerial model is likely to be more or less effective under
these circumstances than more traditional ways of doing business.
Less Innovation Results in Less Competition
One of the first victims of any financial crises is innovation. R&D is
one of the first areas that companies cut in recessionary times. When
companies don’t cut R&D, they ask researchers to work on solutions
to improve productivity rather than create innovative products.
This reduction in innovation is evidenced by the reduction in the
number of patents filed during economic recessions. For example,
as you can see in the following graph, in 1996, following the 1995
recession, the number of patents filed decreased by nearly 15 percent.
In this case, the decline in patent applications was short-lived
and patent activity returned to normal in subsequent years, but in
a very long depression, this assumption can’t be made. For example,
patent filings collapsed in 1929 and did not resume in earnest until
World War II.
Source: United States Patent and Trademark Office 2
212 Chapter 17
This drop in patent activity is further confirmed by a study
conducted on the chemical and pharmaceutical industries in Great
Britain and Germany, two industries that contribute heavily to R&D
expenditures. “In the replies to the questionnaire we sent managers,”
explain its authors, “61% of the respondents indicated that R&D
spending has been decreased during the early 1990s, and 66% said
that less R&D personnel were hired. In addition, 39% indicated
that the focus of R&D had changed, and 33% mainly sought more
cooperation to fight cost.”4
One reason for the decline in expenditures is that many companies
base their R&D budget on past sales. If sales are weak in a
preceding year, R&D expenses will be cut in the following year and
vice versa. Another explanation is, of course, that many companies
disappear during these periods.
Nor does this phenomenon spare the most innovative industries.
For example, as shown in the following graph, the bursting of the
Internet bubble during the early 2000s had an impact on patent
applications in the IT industry as well—an industry known for its
history and emphasis on innovation.
In the IT sector, this situation could be aggravated by the financial
crisis’s impact on one of its major sources of funding: venture
capital. You can probably imagine how reducing the availability of
venture capital could result in the pace of innovations decreasing as
young, cash-strapped companies are forced to cut their R&D budget
for lack of needed funds.
Like all investors, venture capitalists are naturally more demanding
in difficult times. As one such venture capitalist, Will Price of
Source: World Intellectual Property Organization 3
A Look Ahead 213
Hummer Winblad,* explains on his blog: “With a lack of good exits,
why would a VC want to invest in a company?”6 Even those who
would like to take advantage of circumstances may not for lack of
an opportunity to get a significant return on their investment.
The reduction of R&D budgets is likely to have the following
consequences:
• Companies whose business model is too fragile or who still rely
on venture capitalists to finance their growth could disappear.
• Second-rate players are likely to limit or even abandon their
research efforts to focus on their core business.
• Innovative firms lacking in financial resources may seek the protection
of more powerful firms, whether through partnerships
or outright mergers.
* Funded in 1989, Hummer Winblad Venture Partners was the first venture capital fund to invest
exclusively in software companies.
Source: United States Patent and Trademark Office 5
Patent applications in IT (United States)
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
214 Chapter 17
The upshot is that the recession is likely to raise the bar for entry
into the market, thus reducing the likelihood that new competitors
will emerge with ideas that could threaten dominant firms. At the
same time, the recession gives larger firms the chance to buy companies
cheaply. All of this is likely to benefit Google, allowing it to
solidify its strength in many markets and giving it an opportunity
to take over competitors in markets, like social networking, that it
has failed to win.
The Impact on the Advertising Market
Recessions put a crimp on R&D spending, but they really do a
number on advertising budgets, which are highly sensitive to changes
in economic cycles. According to Robert G. Picard, considered by
many to be the father of media economics, a decrease of 1.15 percent
in the gross domestic product, a measure of national income,
leads to an average decrease of 5.98 percent in advertising budgets,
as illustrated in the following graph.7
While the strength of the correlation between recessions and
advertising spending differ among countries (from very strong in
Germany, Finland, the United Kingdom, France, and the United
States to almost nonexistent in Japan), the correlation will be significant
in Google’s main markets. Clearly, Google’s advertising
Effect of change in GDP on advertising expenditures (Source: Robert G. Picard ) 8
Change in GDP (constant)
Change in Ad Exp. (constant)
0%
−5%
−10%
−15%
−20%
−25%
−8% −7% −6% −5% −4% −3% −2% −1% 0%
A Look Ahead 215
revenues are likely to be directly affected by the global recession,
which threatens Google’s business model.
To assess the impact of the world’s economic crisis on Google’s
advertising revenues, consider the evolution of online advertising
and its impact on user behavior and the price of keywords. In 2008,
as has been true at the beginning of every major recession, several
large corporations like Coca-Cola and Visa and many automobile
manufacturers and banks announced reductions in their advertising
budgets. As large advertisers, their decision sent shockwaves
throughout the industry.
Cuts in the advertising budgets of small and medium enterprises
don’t make the front page, but they can significantly impact major
media.* But how will these cuts in advertising spending affect webbased
advertising? In difficult times, advertisers are more concerned
about the costs and direct results of their advertising campaigns.
This quest for results and concern with efficiency should benefit
those advertising vehicles that offer their customers ways to better
control and measure their campaign’s effectiveness. Seen from this
point of view, web-based advertising, especially on a search engine
like Google, should suffer less than advertising in traditional media.
Google may well benefit from the redirection of advertising
budgets as corporations increase online advertising. According to a
study published by McKinsey & Company in 2007, online advertising
is likely to grow significantly over the next few years:
• Only 69 percent of firms interviewed use online media advertising
very frequently.
• Only 30 percent of companies that do use online media spend
more than 10 percent of their budget on this new advertising
vehicle. But that percentage is expected to change quickly: “Three
years from now twice as many respondents believe they will be
spending at least that much online, and 11 percent say they will
be spending the majority of their budgets online.”9
* According to a study conducted by BDO Seidman, one-third of chief marketing officers at leading
US retailers said that their marketing and advertising budgets have been reduced after the financial
market meltdown (BDO Seidman, 2008 Holiday Marketing Release, December 2008).
216 Chapter 17
The main obstacle to this market’s development could be the
lack of appropriately skilled personnel: Success in this new media
demands a skill set not necessarily found in traditional advertising
departments.
Of course, Google is not the only player in the online advertising
game. For example, according to the same McKinsey survey, although
considered to be the most effective form of online advertising, search
engine advertising occupies third place (behind email and banner
advertising) in online advertising budgets. But the balance is likely
to shift quickly: Seventy-one percent of respondents said that their
budgets for search engine advertising would increase. The recession
is unlikely to make them change their mind.
Shrinking advertising budgets should also give Google, the search
engine leader, an advantage because companies are likely to concentrate
most of their effort on the one company that provides them
with the greatest visibility. As a corollary, this shift could hinder the
development of alternative online advertising venues like the social
networks, Facebook, MySpace, and similar sites.
The Rise of eCommerce
When times are tough, consumers price shop. And what better way
to price shop than with a search engine like Google? But electronic
commerce is still only in its infancy. According to the US Census
Bureau, in 2008 online shopping accounted for less than 5 percent
of all retail shopping.10 This surprisingly small number leaves a large
margin for growth.
The growth of eCommerce is naturally friendly to search engines
since consumers turn to them when looking for a product online.
For example, a Performics study conducted in 2007 showed that
70 percent of US mothers who shop online price-shop online before
purchasing, and 57 percent shop online before purchasing in a brickand-
mortar store.11 Why is online price-shopping good for Google?
Because whenever consumers search for products online via Google,
Google serves them ads.
In addition, electronic commerce gives search engines the opportunity
to develop new services and new revenue sources. Google
A Look Ahead 217
could monetize YouTube, for example, with eCommerce, as it offers
advertisers a way to raise product awareness. Further, Google Product
Search (a price comparison service), Google Base (a database that
can be used by companies to sell products), and Google Checkout
(a payment service) all offer Google ways either to sell advertising
directly or to collect a commission on transactions. These are
additional growing sources of revenue that may well benefit from a
recession as consumers do more shopping and buying online.
Traffic Is Not Revenue
But the global recession poses a risk as well. Consider the fact that
Google gets its income from selling keywords at auction. For these
revenues to grow, the number of clicks on ads tied to keywords
must increase and the price of keywords rise. Neither of these can
be inferred from an increase in the number of visitors.
The value of keywords depends on several factors. First, of course,
competition among advertisers is important: The more advertisers
desire a particular word, the more that word’s price increases. But
the value also depends on an advertiser’s skills (poorly chosen words
do not generate clicks), on his or her strategies (those who use web
advertising to build or protect their brand are more interested in
impressions than clicks), and on the advertiser’s financial resources;
obtaining information on competitor bids is difficult, so wealthy
advertisers may bid high to outbid the competition.
The financial turmoil could change all this by reducing competition
and the propensity of large firms to use advertising as a way to
build their brand. The recession could force larger firms to optimize
their spending and pay more attention to ad performance. In fact,
Google’s keyword auction system could conspire to make things more
financially difficult under these circumstances: Unlike other methods
of price setting that ensure a certain stability (what economists call
price stickiness), auctions respond quickly to the slightest changes in
user behavior and economic conditions.12
One of the first effects of this sensitivity to economic conditions
is the seasonality of the cost per keyword, a ratio that combines the cost
per click with the volume of clicks and that represents the average
218 Chapter 17
cost of purchasing a keyword for an entire month. For example,
according to Performics, cost per keyword rose to around $55 in
December 2005 from approximately $26 at the end of August 2005.13
Although this seasonality was concealed by Google’s rapid revenue
growth, seasonality might increase in this recession. Could this cause
a problem for Google’s cash flow? Cash flow is usually the greatest
challenge for companies that experience large seasonal fluctuations.
Google is, of course, a special case, but increased seasonality could
encourage its managers to strengthen their investment in activities
than can be monetized by means other than advertising (like cloud
computing, for example, which we will discuss shortly) in order to
level out cash flow.*
Recessions: A Time to Reorganize
During financial crises and recessions, companies reduce their costs,
restructure, and streamline their organization. Some restructure
because they are forced to; others restructure simply to take advantage
of the situation. Two factors contribute to these moves:
• Employees afraid to lose their jobs accept measures they would
have fought otherwise, such as pay cuts, reduced work weeks,
and reduced benefits.
• The production slowdown gives firms the opportunity to invest
in productivity-improving activities such as reorganization or
training. As Robert E. Hall of Stanford University explains,
“Measured output may be low during (recession) periods, but
the time spent reorganizing pays off in its contribution to future
productivity.”14
In other words, the cost of productivity-improving activities falls.
This trend could benefit Google and, more generally, companies that
offer hosting solutions and software to reduce the costs associated
with data processing.
* The seasonality of prices during recessions has been little researched, but the few studies on the
subject seem to suggest that seasonality is more significant during these periods. See, for instance,
Antonio Matas-Mir and Denise R. Osborn, “Does Seasonality Change Over the Business Cycle? An
Investigation Using Monthly Industrial Production Series,” University of Manchester, Center for
Growth & Business Cycle Research, July 2003, Number 009, http://www.ses.man.ac.uk/cgbcr/discussi.htm.
A Look Ahead 219
Two areas seem particularly promising:
• Online office automation and collaboration tools (à la Google
Docs) that can help reduce the cost of traveling and collaborating
• Cloud computing, a technology that allows the outsourcing of
applications and data to the computers and networks of companies
like Google, IBM, Microsoft, or Amazon.com
While companies are unlikely to port all of their applications
to the Web and close all of their data centers (as some analysts once
thought they would), this technology is likely to expand thanks to
the financial crisis. Rather than abandoning expensive projects due
to shrinking budgets, IT departments will be able to implement
these projects without investing scarce financial resources. When
cloud computing is used, investment capital can be replaced with
operating expenses.
Like eCommerce, cloud computing offers Google the opportunity
to find new income sources. However, Google’s search market
dominance will not help much in this new business. Google’s lack
of knowledge of large firms and their ERP tools and the lack of
skills and staff in traditional IT and consulting services could be real
obstacles, especially in the face of competitors like IBM, HP, and
Oracle. Nevertheless, Google still has a major asset in this market:
its ability to manage, store, and analyze huge amounts of data.
Recessions: An Opportunity to Streamline
Google could be satisfied with these rather optimistic forecasts
about its ability to survive the recession, but the company won’t be
idle. Google will take advantage of this recession to reorganize. As
of this writing, Google has already announced several cost-cutting
measures, including the following:
• Reducing the number of HR consultants and other temporary
personnel
• Cutting employee benefits and perks
• Slowing new staff recruitment
220 Chapter 17
• Simplifying its product line by removing duplicate products
(such as Page Creator and Google Sites) and closing services that
have not found their public (such as Lively or Datasets Research)
• Introducing advertising for new products such as Google Finance
In my opinion, Google’s main efforts should focus on streamlining
its procedures and its product range. Its rapid growth and
acquisition pace has created a host of coordination problems that
won’t be solved by quickly expanding its administrative departments.
The company is simply littered with too many projects, trying to do
too many things with not enough overall coordination. The time has
come for Google to better integrate its products, rethink and improve
coordination among departments, and implement procedures for
allocating budgets that take greater account of a project’s profitability.
These changes are, for some, long overdue, but they are not
without risk. They are likely to create tension within the company,
not only between management and employees but also between the
co-founders: Agreeing on spending cuts is much more difficult than
agreeing on budget increases.
These cost-cutting moves may also negatively impact staff motivation
and loyalty. Engineers may fear changes to the business model
that would make Google “another boring big firm.” New methods
for allocating budgets based on profitability could also affect the
very delicate balance between financial incentives and the personal
rewards that come from the satisfaction of creating a great product
or respect from peers (as discussed in Chapters 6 and 16).
This risk is made all the more real because the current economic
crisis has deeply affected Google’s wage models, which are based on
stock options and profit sharing. The rapid decline of stock markets
is forcing all major US companies to invent new ways to remunerate
their employees, and Google won’t be an exception.
The task won’t be an easy one. Companies traditionally resist
reducing wages during recessions for fear of reducing employee
morale. As Truman Bewley explains in his book, Why Wages Don’t Fall
During a Recession (based on interviews with 300 business executives,
labor leaders, and professional recruiters), “employers resist pay cuts
largely because the savings from lower wages are usually outweighed
A Look Ahead 221
by the cost of denting workers’ morale. . . . Falling morale raises
staff turnover and reduces productivity. Cheerier workers are more
productive workers, not only because they work better, but also
because they identify more closely with the company’s interests. In
other words, firms typically prefer layoffs to pay cuts because they
do less harm to morale.”15
Management: A Recession-Proof Model?
Google’s management model is particularly unique among companies.
The question is, will Google’s management model help the company
mitigate the consequences of a deep recession? And if so, how?
In order for any company’s management to guide a business
through a recession, management must be able to do the following:
• Adapt products and organization structure quickly to meet the
changing demands of customers
• Reduce the impact of reorganization and staff cuts on employee
morale and productivity
The way Google manages its products and innovation should
help. The company should be able to adapt quickly to changing
markets and the demands of its customers for these reasons:
• Thanks to Google’s Swiss Army knife approach to product
development, products can change quickly.
• The “release early and often” principle allows Google to adapt to
users’ expectations and amend its products as necessary.
• The use of open source solutions and Google’s special relationship
with users and developers facilitate the rapid integration
of innovations.
Google’s management structure, composed of small teams and
lacking in hierarchy, should be an asset in difficult economic times. Its
effectiveness is obvious when compared to what happens in companies
that downsize. In a traditional hierarchical organization, downsizing
means reduced promotion prospects, limiting management layers,
and fewer career opportunities for everyone. But at Google, where
222 Chapter 17
much of one’s job satisfaction is intrinsic and where improving one’s
reputation among peers is perhaps as important as improving one’s
position within the hierarchy, the chances of declining motivation
due to downsizing are reduced.
Effective in good economic times, Google’s management model
should also help in economic downturns. Although its model does
not eliminate the effects of a recession, it should limit them significantly
and allow for a quick rebound, post-recession.
Google Post-Recession: Stronger but More Cautious
Google will probably resist this recession, and this period may
give Google an opportunity to strengthen its dominant position in
the market for online advertising and to create new revenue-producing
services. Nevertheless, the economic crisis should remind Google that,
despite its near-term successes, its economic model, based almost
solely on advertising, is highly sensitive to economic changes. This
time Google should get a pass, but that won’t always be the case.
Google needs to diversify its income sources in the same way that
all major US companies did in the wake of the Great Depression.
The recession will force Google to rethink, restructure, and
reorganize. Some efforts will be welcomed, but Google faces many
risks. If clumsily implemented, the changes that Google will be forced
to make to its business could create tension within the company
and affect one of its most precious endowments: the morale of its
employees and the goodwill that it has generated in the marketplace.
Afterword:
A Model for All Managers?
More than an exceptional personal and collective
adventure, Google represents the invention of a new
management model—and calling it revolutionary
is no exaggeration. Analysis reveals some of the
features that have distinguished other great industrial
revolutions: the discovery of a mass market,
the invention of products, the development of new
techniques for marketing and staff management.
Like every great management revolution, this one
draws its legitimacy from the way it adapted to an
economic, social, and cultural environment very
different from that of companies formed during
the 1970s and 1980s.
224 Afterword
Technology plays a decisive part in all of this. You’ve seen throughout
this book how Google put technology at the core of its management
practices. Technology is used as a tool for internal coordination
rather than hierarchical control; as an interface between the company
and its customers and users; and of course, as the engine of its information
system. But the integration of technology into management
methods is only one aspect of this revolution. This revolution also
has a social dimension. Rarely has any enterprise relied as much as
Google on the “voluntary capital” of its workers, their contacts, and
their relationships to test new products or to garner new ideas and
enhance products. Undoubtedly, Google is the first company to
have figured out how to benefit from the development of fan communities
comprised not only of evangelists but also of observers and
pitiless critics (Google’s most effective information sources precisely
because their criticism is so severe).
Google’s repeated successes have created genuine enigmas for
anyone interested in management strategy. To summarize just a few:
• Google has never spent a cent on advertising.
• The public is welcome to criticize the company.
• Google has no qualms about breaking every managerial rule in
the book, refusing to observe even the most elementary marketing
practices.
• For a long time, Google paid developers less than the competition—
yet the company has attracted the best employees and
kept them longer.
So how did Google become one of the world’s best-known
brands in only a few years? How did Google get away with all this?
Throughout this book, I have tried to answer these questions,
among others, and I’ve attempted to explain the solutions Google
has adopted to achieve these results. Yet taking these methods at face
value and turning them into applicable recipes for every company
and situation would be difficult. Bookstores are full of tomes that
promise to teach the seven, eight, or ten “laws” or “steps” to success.
Only the naïve would take them literally. Management has no
A Model for All Managers? 225
more absolute laws than economics does. Or rather, as soon as you
think you’ve found a law, another idea comes along to contradict it
instantly. This is predictable: No two companies are alike. Even those
that closely resemble each other have their own unique history, work
in different institutional contexts and economic environments, and
thus do not fall under the same sets of constraints.
Nobody will create a successful company simply by copying
Google. Managers would do better to ask the same questions Google’s
leaders asked themselves, with the goal of gaining insight wherever
possible from Google’s methods. Then they will need to adapt those
methods to their own business in ways that meet their own challenges.
Success in management, as in any other discipline, requires
both work and imagination. Of course, innovation is where Google
sets a real example. Of all the strategies its leaders instituted, the
20 percent rule is certainly the most surprising. Yet implementing
it is easy wherever employees are asked to demonstrate creativity.
Industrial research laboratories come naturally to mind, but
this principle can also be found in some of the strangest places,
like a famous restaurant in southwestern France that earned two
stars in the Michelin guide.* The chef has built his reputation on
the originality of his cuisine and his ability to introduce new menu
items regularly. Each month, he asks his sous-chefs to invent a new
recipe during their working hours. These creations are tested by
all the employees, the best are placed on an “experimental” menu
board that is shown to the customers, and the most successful dishes
make their way onto the main menu. The benefits of this approach
are comparable to those that Google derives from the 20 percent
rule: The chef can easily add new menu items without much risk;
he attracts the best, most creative apprentices; and he improves his
reputation in the medium of cuisine, which is the best way to satisfy
both customers and critics.
Google’s Swiss Army knife approach and beta releases of new
products offer other solutions for complexity and uncertainty. I can
safely say that Google’s management model will spread throughout
* Michelin is quite stingy about awarding stars. In all of France, 620 restaurants have a single star;
70 have two stars; and only 26 are in the rarefied three-star category (2006 figures).
226 Afterword
the world of software development. But beyond the benefits to the
management of complexity, the Google model reduces delays in making
decisions, delays that can affect the marketing of new products.
Users participate in product design. One of Google’s strong suits is
its ability to revisit relationships with its users and customers.
Companies all claim they want to make the customer the centerpiece
of the company. This claim has become one of the most current
themes in management literature. But usually, the more they say
it, the less they do it. Google shows that companies really can give
users a higher priority by doing the following things:
• Giving the customer a voice in saying what price he or she is
willing to pay through the AdWords bidding system.
• Collecting data on how its tools are used and by sharing this
information with the people who design the products without
filters or intermediaries. The marketing experts no longer dictate
to engineers what users want; the users themselves dictate it
through their daily actions.
• Drawing on employees’ imagination and abilities to develop
applications that look interesting. If IKEA revolutionized the
world of furniture with the assemble-it-yourself approach, Google
(and others, like Wikipedia) have given us a different model that
puts intelligence at the service of every single individual.
But above all, keep this one thing in mind: When given a voice,
customers will speak up. This prevents them from taking the alternative
course, which is to go away.
Google can also be used as a model in the field of human
resources. By emphasizing reputation, the company reevaluated
social control and the intrinsic motivations too often neglected by
traditional organizations: “I will work to fulfill my inner needs, to
gain recognition, and to earn the respect of my colleagues.” And
yes, the vast majority of employees will do just that. This device
simultaneously allows Google to reduce its hierarchical structure
greatly, to retain employees who might have been tempted to look
elsewhere, and to solve the recurring problem of finding a way to
A Model for All Managers? 227
promote technicians who are highly skilled but don’t necessarily
have the personal qualities of good managers.
To manage innovation, human resources, products, and customer
relations, Google’s leaders looked at the problems all companies
encounter from a new angle. They were able to define and simultaneously
solve the problems of division of labor and specialization with
distinguished results. They have managed to build a rich, complex
model that serves not only as an example to emulate but also as a
subject of study for anyone interested in corporate management.

Notes
Chapter 1
1. Vannevar Bush, “As We May Think,” The Atlantic Monthly, July 1945, 101–8.
2. Ibid.
3. Larry Page and Sergey Brin, “The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual
Web Search Engine,” Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 30, no. 1–7
(April 1998).
4. Paul Gompers et al., “Skill vs. Luck in Entrepreneurship and Venture
Capital: Evidence from Serial Entrepreneurs,” NBER Working Paper Series
No. 12592, 2006.
5. Ronald J. Gilson, “Corporate Governance and Economic Efficiency: When
Do Institutions Matter?” Washington University Law Quarterly 74, no. 2
(1996): 327–45.
6. James Gleick, “Patently Absurd,” The New York Times Magazine, March 12,
2000, 44–9.
7. “Letter from the Founders, ‘An Owner’s Manual’ for Google’s Shareholders,”
Form S-1 Registration Statement, April 29, 2004, i.
Chapter 2
1. Marcel Mauss, The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic
Societies, trans. W. D. Halls (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2000).
2. Robert B. Ekelund, Jr. and Robert F. Hebert, Secret Origins of Modern
Microeconomics: Dupuit and the Engineers (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1999).
3. Stuart Elliott, “How Effective Is This Ad in Real Numbers? Beats Me,” The
New York Times, July 20, 2005.
4. Peter Coy, “The Secret to Google’s Success,” BusinessWeek, March 6, 2006,
http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_10/b3974071.htm.
5. Joseph Weizenbaum, Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment
to Calculation (New York: Penguin Books Ltd., 1984).
6. Byron Reeves and Clifford Nass, The Media Equation: How People Treat
Computers, Television, and New Media Like Real People and Places (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1996).
230 Notes
7. Brendan Kitts and Benjamin Leblanc, ‘‘Optimal Bidding on Keyword Auctions,’’
Electronic Markets 14, no. 3 (September 2004): 186–201.
8. Ben Charny, “Some Google Advertisers Cutting Spending,” MarketWatch,
January 3, 2007, http://www.marketwatch.com/news/story/google-advertiserscutting-
spending-keyword/story.aspx?guid={E9B9CEA8-EA47-48C6-A91F-
69F53F018AE2}.
9. Chris Anderson, The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business is Selling Less of
More (New York: Hyperion, 2006). See also Clay Shirky, “Power Laws, Weblogs,
and Inequality,” email to Networks, Economics, and Culture mailing list, February
8, 2003, http://www.shirky.com/, and Lada A. Adamic and Bernardo A.
Huberman, “Zipf ’s Law and the Internet,” Glottometrics 3 (2002): 143–150.
10. Rajeev Kohli and Raaj Sah, “Market Shares: Some Regularities,” 2004,
http://www.economics.smu.edu.sg/events/Paper/Sah.pdf.
11. Gal Oestreicher-Singer and Arun Sundararajan, “Recommendation
Networks and the Long Tail of Electronic Commerce,” (presented at the
27th International Conference on Information Systems, Milwaukee, WI,
December 2006).
12. Catherine Tucker and Juanjuan Zhang, “How Does Popularity Information
Affect Choices? Theory and A Field Experiment,” MIT Sloan School
Working Paper 4655-07, March 31, 2008.
13. Gavin O’Malley, “Marketers Threaten To Put Majority Of Budget Online,”
MediaPost, November 13, 2007, http://www.mediapost.com/publications/index
.cfm?fuseaction=Articles.san&s=70866&Nid=36310&p=411263.
14. Eric Schmidt, quoted by Chris Anderson, “Google’s Long Tail,” The
Long Tail, February 12, 2005, http://www.longtail.com/the_long_tail/2005/02/
googles_long_ta.html.
15. James Manyika, “Google’s view on the future of business: An interview with
CEO Eric Schmidt,” The McKinsey Quarterly, September 2008, http://www
.mckinseyquarterly.com/Googles_view_on_the_future_of_business_An_interview_
with_CEO_Eric_Schmidt_2229.
Chapter 3
1. Arijit Chatterjee and Donald C. Hambrick, “It’s all about me: Narcissistic
CEOs and their effects on company strategy and performance,” Administrative
Science Quarterly 52, no. 3 (2007): 351–86.
Chapter 4
1. Christopher Sacca, “Seriously, You Can’t Touch This . . .,” Chris Sacca’s ‘What
is Left?’, October 22, 2005, http://www.whatisleft.org/lookie_here/2005/10/
index.html.
Notes 231
2. Bill Gates, interview by David Allison, “Transcript of a Video History
Interview with Mr. William “Bill” Gates,” Microsoft Corporation, Bellevue,
Washington, http://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/comphist/gates.htm.
3. Dr. John Sullivan, “A Case Study of Google Recruiting: Can Any Firm
Compete Against This Recruiting Machine?” May 12, 2005, http://www
.drjohnsullivan.com/content/view/81/33/.
4. Peter Norvig, “Hiring: The Lake Wobegon Strategy,” Offical Google Research
Blog, March 11, 2006, http://googleresearch.blogspot.com/2006/03/hiring-lakewobegon-
strategy.html.
5. David A. Vise, The Google Story (London: Macmillan, 2005).
6. Greg Linden, “Early Amazon: Interviews,” Geeking with Greg, February 21,
2006, http://glinden.blogspot.com/2006/02/early-amazon-interviews.html.
7. Sara Robinson, “Computer Scientists Optimize Innovative Ad Auction,”
SIAM News 38, no. 3 (April 2005).
8. Kevin J. Delaney, “Google Adjusts Hiring Process as Needs Grow,” Wall
Street Journal, October 23, 2006.
Chapter 5
1. Susan Lammer, ed., Programmers at Work: Interviews with 19 Programmers
Who Shaped the Computer Industry (Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 1986).
2. Mike Pinkerton, “Time for a change,” Sucking Less, On a Budget, September
7, 2005, http://weblogs.mozillazine.org/pinkerton/archives/008843.html.
3. George Akerlof, “Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wage Theory: Four Views,”
American Economic Review 74, no. 2 (May 1984): 79–83.
4. Joseph Weizenbaum, Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment
to Calculation (New York: Penguin Books Ltd., 1984).
5. Fyodor Dostoyevsky, The Gambler, 1867.
Chapter 6
1. Fara Warner, “How Google Searches Itself,” Fast Company, June 2002.
2. Russ Mitchell, “How to Manage Geeks,” Fast Company, May 1999.
3. Charles de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws (London:
G. Bells & Sons, Ltd., 1914), http://www.constitution.org/cm/sol.htm.
Chapter 7
1. Rajshree Agarwal and Michael Gort, “First Mover Advantage and the Speed
of Competitive Entry 1887–1986,” Journal of Law and Economics 44, no. 1
(2001): 161–178.
232 Notes
2. Ben Elgin, “Managing Google’s Idea Factory,” BusinessWeek, October 3,
2005, http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/05_40/b3953093.htm.
3. Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations
(1776), http://www.adamsmith.org/smith/won-index.htm.
4. Paul Graham, “Cities and Ambition,” May 2008, http://www.paulgraham
.com/cities.html.
5. Peter Schwartz and Kevin Kelly, “The Relentless Contrarian,” Wired,
August 1996.
6. William Baumol, The Free Market Innovation Machine: Analyzing the Growth
Miracle of Capitalism (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002).
Chapter 8
1. Marissa Mayer, interview by Mark Hurst, October 15, 2002, Good Experience,
http://goodexperience.com/2002/10/interview-marissa-mayer-produc.php.
Chapter 9
1. “At Google, Innovation is Not Just Fun, Games,” LA Times, June 12, 2006.
2. Margaret Bradley, “Gaspard-Clair-François-Marie-Riche de Prony:
His Career as Educator and Scientist” (PhD thesis, Coventry Lanchester
Polytechnic, 1984).
3. Nelson Schwartz, “Emperor of Steel,” Fortune, July 2006.
4. Thomas Davenport, “Competing on Analytics,” Harvard Business Review,
January 1, 2006.
5. G. Th. Guilbaud, Leçons d’à-peu-près (Lessons of Approximately) (Paris:
Christian Bourgois, 1985).
6. Laurent Lafforgue, “Mathematics and Truth” (address at reception for
Academy of Sciences members accepted in 2003, June 2004).
7. Sergey Brin, James Davis, and Hector Garcia-Molina, “Copy Detection
Mechanisms for Digital Documents” (presented at the ACM International
Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD 1995), San Jose, California,
May 22–25, 1995).
Chapter 10
1. Ian Hamilton, The Soul and Body of an Army (London: Edward Arnold &
Co., 1921).
2. John Kenneth Galbraith, The New Industrial State (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1967).
Notes 233
3. Jeff Bezos, “5 Lessons from Amazon.com’s Jeff Bezos,” Wall Street Journal,
February 4, 2000.
4. Robert D. Hof, “Jeff Bezos: ‘Blind-alley’ Explorer,” BusinessWeek,
August 19, 2004, http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/aug2004/
nf20040819_7348_db_81.htm.
5. Uschi Backes-Gellner, Alwine Mohnen, and Arndt Werner, “Team Size
and Effort in Start-Up Teams—Another Consequence of Free-Riding and
Peer Pressure in Partnerships,” University of Zurich, Institute for Strategy and
Business Economics (ISU) Working Papers series, March 2004.
6. Rupert Sausgruber, “Testing for TEAM Spirit, an Experimental Study,”
University of Innsbruck working paper, July 2005.
Chapter 11
1. James D. Thompson, Organizations in Action: Social Science Bases of
Administrative Theory (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967).
2. Terry Winograd and Fernando Flores, Understanding Computers and
Cognition: A New Foundation for Design (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1985).
3. Friedrich A. Hayek, Law, Legislation and Liberty (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1978).
4. Michael Polanyi, The Logic of Liberty: Reflections and Rejoinders (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1951).
5. Biz Stone, Who Let the Blogs Out: A Hyperconnected Peek at the World of
Weblogs (New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 2004).
6. Alan Deutschman, “Inside the Mind of Jeff Bezos,” Fast Company,
August 2004.
7. V. A. Graicunas, “Relationship in Organization,” Bulletin of the International
Institute Management 7 (March 1933): 39–42.
8. Douglas Engelbart, “Toward High-Performance Organizations: A Strategic
Role for Groupware,” in Groupware ’92, 77–100 (San Francisco: Morgan
Kauffman Publishers Inc., 1992).
9. Michael Hammer, “Reengineering Work: Don’t Automate, Obliterate,”
Harvard Business Review, July 1, 1990.
Chapter 12
1. Michael Hammer and James Champy, Reengineering the Corporation: A
Manifesto for Business Revolution (New York: HarperBusiness Essentials, 2003).
2. Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat, “MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing
on Large Clusters” (paper presented at the Sixth Symposium on Operating
System Design and Implementation, San Francisco, CA, December 6–8, 2004).
234 Notes
3. Sanjay Ghemawat, Howard Gobioff, and Shun-Tak Leung, “The Google
File System” (paper presented at the 19th ACM Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, Lake George, NY, October 2003).
Part III
1. Larry Page and Sergey Brin, “The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual
Web Search Engine,” Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 30, no. 1–7
(April 1998).
Chapter 13
1. Robert Papper, Michael Holmes, Mark Popovich, Paul Biner, Melinda
Messineo, and Mike Bloxham, “The Computer: A Medium for All Reasons,”
Ball State University Center for Media Design, July 2006.
2. Mark A. Libbert, comment posted on WebmasterWorld.com, July 12, 2006,
http://www.webmasterworld.com/google_adwords/3003366.htm.
Chapter 14
1. David Court, Thomas D. French, and Trond Riiber Knudsen, “The
Proliferation Challenge,” The McKinsey Quarterly, June 2006, http://www
.mckinseyquarterly.com/Profiting_from_Proliferation_1810.
2. Everett Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations (Glencoe, IL: The Free Press of
Glencoe, 1962).
3. Frank M. Bass, “A New Product Growth for Model Consumer Durables,”
Management Science 15, no. 5 (January 1969): 215–227.
4. Frank M. Bass, “A New Product Growth for Model Consumer Durables,”
Management Science 15, no. 5 (January 1969): 217.
5. John Conlisk and Dennis E. Smallwood, “Product Quality in Markets
Where Consumers Are Imperfectly Informed,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
93, no. 1 (February 1979): 1–23.
6. Patrick Grobmann, “In der Zukunft wird Google noch mehr über
Sie wissen,” Spiegel Online, April 3, 2006, http://www.spiegel.de/netzwelt/
tech/0,1518,409431,00.html.
7. Andrew McLaughlin, “Google in China,” The Official Google Blog, January
27, 2006, http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2006/01/google-in-china.html.
8. Saul Hansell, “Google Shows New Services in Battle of Search Engines,”
The New York Times, May 11, 2006.
9. Paul Resnick et al., “The Value of Reputation on eBay: A Controlled Experiment,”
Experimental Economics 9, no. 2 (June 2006): 79–101.
Notes 235
10. Doug Edwards, “If a logo changes every day, is it still a logo?” Xooglers,
May 18, 2006, http://xooglers.blogspot.com/2006/05/if-logo-changes-every-dayis-
it-still.html.
11. Benedictus de Spinoza, On the Improvement of the Understanding (1662),
(Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing, 2004).
12. Margaret Blair, quoting Richard Freeman, “Closing the Theory Gap:
How the Economic Theory of Property Rights Can Help Bring Stakeholders
Back into Theories of the Firm,” Journal of Management and Governance 9,
no. 1 (2005): 33–9.
13. John Gapper, “Search Engines Are Not the Only Sites,” Financial Times,
March 6, 2006.
14. David Kiley, “Advertising Of, By, and For the People,” BusinessWeek, July 25,
2005, http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/05_30/b3944097.htm.
Chapter 15
1. Deborah Fallows, “Search Engine Use,” Pew Internet & American Life
Project, August 6, 2008, http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Search_Aug08
.pdf.
2. UK Office for National Statistics, “Internet Retail Sales: December 2008,”
January 23, 2009, http://www.statistics.gov.uk/pdfdir/irs0109.pdf; and “Retail
Sales Slow in December,” January 28, 2009, http://www.statistics.gov.uk/cci/
nugget.asp?ID=256.
3. Interbrand, “Best Global Brands: 2008 Rankings,” http://www.interbrand
.com/best_global_brands.aspx.
4. Outsell, Inc., “Outsell, Inc. Pegs Click Fraud as $1.3 Billion Problem
that Threatens Business Models of Google, Others,” Press Release, July
2006, http://www.outsellinc.com/site_map/press_releases/click_fraud_threatens_
google; and Click Forensics, “Industry Click Fraud Rate Hovers at 16 Percent
for Third Quarter 2008,” Press Release, October 23, 2008, http://www
.clickforensics.com/newsroom/press-releases/114-industry-click-fraud-rate-hoversat-
16-percent-for-third-quarter-2008.html.
5. Alexander Tuzhilin, “The Lane’s Gifts vs. Google Report,” July 2006, http://
googleblog.blogspot.com/pdf/Tuzhilin_Report.pdf.
6. George Reyes, quoted by Krysten Crawford, “Google CFO: Fraud a big
threat,” CNNMoney.com, December 2, 2004, http://money.cnn.com/2004/12/02/
technology/google_fraud/index.htm.
7. Donna Bogatin, “Google CEO on Click Fraud: ‘Let It Happen’ Is Perfect
Economic Solution,” ZDNet, July 9, 2006, http://blogs.zdnet.com/micromarkets/?
p=219.
236 Notes
8. Darren Waters, “Google to stay focused on search,” BBC News, July 3,
2006, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/5140066.stm.
9. Joseph Menn and Chris Gaither, “U.S. Obtains Internet Users’ Search
Records,” Los Angeles Times, January 20, 2006, http://articles.latimes.com/2006/
jan/20/business/fi-google20.
10. James Q. Whitman, “The Two Western Cultures of Privacy: Dignity Versus
Liberty,’’ Yale Law Journal 113 (April 2004): 1151–1221.
11. Ashlee Vance, “Sun Founders Confess All During Walk Down Workstation
Lane,” The Register, January 12, 2006, http://www.theregister.co.uk/2006/01/12/
sun_founders/.
12. Hal R. Varian, “Economic Aspects of Personal Privacy,” Privacy and
Self-Regulation in the Information Age, National Telecommunications and
Information Administration, June 1997, http://people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~hal/
Papers/privacy/.
13. Arthur R. Miller, The Assault on Privacy (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1971).
14. Jessica Litman, “Information Privacy/Information Property,” Stanford
Law Review 52, no. 5 (May 2000): 1283–1313, http://www-personal.umich
.edu/~jdlitman/papers/infoprivacy.pdf.
15. Susannah Fox, “Online Health Search 2006,” Pew Internet & American
Life Project, October 29, 2006, http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Online_
Health_2006.pdf.
16. Peter Fleischer and Nicole Wong, “Taking Steps to Further Improve Our
Privacy Practices,” March 14, 2007, http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2007/03/
taking-steps-to-further-improve-our.html.
17. Luke O’Brien, “Yahoo Betrayed My Husband,” Wired, March 15, 2007,
http://www.wired.com/politics/onlinerights/news/2007/03/72972.
18. Matta Security Limited, “Internet-Based Counterintelligence,” 2002, http://
www.trustmatta.com/downloads/pdf/Matta_Counterintelligence.pdf.
19. Online Publishers Association, “Frames of Reference: Online Video
Advertising Content and Consumer Behavior,” June 2007, http://www
.online-publishers.org/media/file/OPAFramesofReferenceFINA1024.pdf.
20. Nielsen Online, “Top Online Brands for Streaming Video: October
2008,” December 18, 2008, http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/
top-online-brands-for-streaming-video-october-2008/.
21. Kevin J. Delaney, “Google Push to Sell Ads on YouTube Hits Snags,” Wall Street
Journal, July 9, 2008, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB121557163349038289
.html.
Notes 237
22. LiveInternet, “Site Statistics,” http://www.liveinternet.ru/stat/ru/searches
.html (accessed January 26, 2009).
23. Hermann Havermann, quoted in Reuters and ABC Science Online,
“Search Engine to Target Arabic Speakers,” April 26, 2006, http://www.abc
.net.au/news/newsitems/200604/s1624108.htm.
24. People’s Daily online, “Quaero lance un défi à Google,” May 11, 2006,
http://french.peopledaily.com.cn/Horizon/4364864.html.
25. Bill Gates, interview with Peter Jennings, “One-on-One with Bill Gates,”
World News Tonight, ABC, February 16, 2005, http://abcnews.go.com/wnt/
Story?id=506354&page=2.
26. Mike Ricciuti, “Microsoft to Google: Hands Off Enterprise Search,”
CNET News, July 13, 2006, http://news.cnet.com/2100-1012_3-6094002.html.
27. Eric Schmidt, “A Note to Google Users on Net Neutrality,” 2008, http://
www.google.com/help/netneutrality_letter.html.
28. Edith Penrose, “Limits to the Growth and Size of Firms,” The American
Economic Review 45, no. 2 (1955): 531–543.
Chapter 16
1. Danny Sullivan, “25 Things I Hate About Google, ” March 2006, http://
blog.searchenginewatch.com/blog/060313-161500.
2. Albert Hirschman, “Having Opinions, One of the Elements of Well-Being,”
American Economic Review 79, no. 2 (May 1989): 75–9.
3. Friedrich A. Hayek, “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” American Economic
Review 35 no. 4 (September 1945): 519–30.
4. Punt Soni, “Farewell, Google Catalog Search,” Inside Google Book Search,
January 14, 2009, http://booksearch.blogspot.com/2009/01/farewell-googlecatalog-
search.html.
5. Paul A. David, “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY,” American Economic
Review 75, no. 2 (May 1985): 332–7.
6. Sec Form 4, “Insider Stock Transactions–Google, Inc. (GOOG),” http://
www.secform4/insider-trading/1288776.htm.
7. Alan D. Jagolinzer, “Do Insiders Trade Strategically Within the SEC Rule
10b5-1 Safe Harbor?” Stanford Graduate School of Business Working Paper,
July 2008.
Chapter 17
1. Joseph A. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (1942; repr.,
New York: Harper & Row, 1975), 82–5.
238 Notes
2. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, “Patent Counts by Class by Year: January
1977–December 2006,” http://www.uspto.gov/go/taf/cbcby.htm.
3. World Intellectual Property Organization, “World Patent Report: A Statistical
Review,” http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/ipstats/en/statistics/patents/
pdf/wipo_pub_931.pdf.
4. Klaus K. Brockoff and Alan W. Pearson, “R&D Budgeting Reactions to a
Recession,” Management International Review, October 1998.
5. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, “Patent Counts by Class by Year: January
1977–December 2006,” http://www.uspto.gov/go/taf/cbcby.htm.
6. Jason, “What Is The Effect of the “Pending” Recession on Venture Capital
Financings of Private Companies?” Ask the VC, January 23, 2008, http://www
.askthevc.com/blog/archives/2008/01/what-is-the-eff.php.
7. Robert G. Picard, “Effects of Recessions on Advertising Expenditures: An
Exploratory Study of Economic Downturns in Nine Developed Nations,”
Journal of Media Economics 14, no. 1 (January 2001): 1–14.
8. Ibid.
9. “How Companies Are Marketing Online: A McKinsey Global Survey,”
The McKinsey Quarterly, September 2007, http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/
How_companies_are_marketing_online_A_McKinsey_Global_Survey_2048.
10. U.S. Census Bureau, “Online Retail Spending, 2001–2007, and Projections,
2008” The Statistical Abstract of the United States (from Jupiter Research,
Inc.), http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/wholesale_retail_trade/online_
retail_sales.html.
11. DoubleClick Perfomics, “Searcher Moms: A Search Behavior and Usage
Study,” October 12, 2007, http://www.performics.com/think-tank/original-research/
white-papers/searcher-moms-a-search-behavior-and-usage-study/350.
12. Arthur M. Okun, Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconmic Analysis (Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1981).
13. Wendy Davis, “Keyword Costs Show Seasonal Spike,” MediaPost, February
22, 2006, http://www.mediapost.com/publications/index.cfm?fa=Articles
.showArticle&art_aid=40109.
14. Robert E. Hall, “Recessions as Reorganizations,” in NBER Macroeconomics
Annual (Boston: The MIT Press, 1991).
15. Unsigned review of Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession, by Truman
F. Bewley, The Economist, February 24, 2000.
symbols and Numbers
@LastSoftware, 147
3M Company, 64
15 percent rule, 64
20 percent strategy, 63–68,
198, 202
70/20/10 strategy, 154
80/20 rule, 40
A
AdSense, 38–39, 66, 88, 171
advertising, 29–36
automating, 33–35
bidding process, 33, 35–36, 226
challenges, 167–175
cost-per-click strategy,
30–31, 174
Google, 32–35
impact of recession on,
214–216
informative, 33
measuring effectiveness of, 30
minimalist, 32–35
online, 167–168, 215–216, 222
persuasive, 33
two-sided markets, 29
AdWords, 32, 34–36, 88, 98
Agarwal, Rajshree, 76
AI (artificial intelligence), 11
Akerlof, George, 66
Allen, Paul, 10
Amazon.com, 20, 24, 118
ANA (Association of National
Advertisers), 30
analysis, data, 99–103
Anderson, Chris, 39–42
APIs (application programming
interfaces), 82, 146
Apple products, 34, 78, 83, 107
application programming interfaces
(APIs), 82, 146
ARPANet, 158
artificial intelligence (AI), 11
Association of National Advertisers
(ANA), 30
automated sales model, 135–141
automation tools, 219
B
Baidu search engine, 183–184
banners, 32
Bass Diffusion Model, 149–150
Battelle, John, 145
BDO Seidman, 215
Bechtolsheim, Andy, 16–17
Becker, Howard S., 10
Bemmaor, Albert, 151
Bentham, Jeremy, 152, 155
beta applications, 86, 93, 199
Bewley, Truman, 220–221
Bezos, Jeff, 24, 108, 118
Bharat, Krishna, 79
bidding process, 33, 35–36, 226
“Big Brother,” 175–176
Blogger, 115, 116, 194
blogs. See also online communities
of Google employees, 115–117
posts about Google, 144–146,
153–154
in search results, 140
spam on, 173
Index
240 Index
Boolean operators, 13
bootstrapping, 85
BPR (Business Process
Reengineering), 121
brand awareness, 33, 87,
170–171, 201
“brand democratization,” 159
Bricklin, Dan, 10
Brien, Nick, 41
Brin, Sergey, 48–51
character traits, 9–11
early years, 10, 11–12, 125
friendship with Page, 10
perspectives, 51
stock option sales, 204
bugs, 85, 91, 93
bureaucracy, 57, 80, 105–106,
197–199
Bush, Vannevar, 11–12
Business Process Reengineering
(BPR), 121
C
California
absence of noncompete
clauses in, 18
as entrepreneurial hotbed,
16–19
Silicon Valley, 2, 18, 19, 24,
80, 81
venture capital firms in, 17–21
Camino web browser, 65
captive sales techniques, 28
cash flow, 218
cell phones, 39, 94, 177–178
censorship, 145, 152, 153,
155, 182
Champy, James, 121
channel surfing, 38–39
Chinese market, 145, 152–155,
178, 182–184
chunk servers, 128
CIA information, 179
click fraud, 152, 153, 171–175
click-through rate (CTR), 36,
169, 171
cloaking, 173
cloud computing, 188, 219
code, copyright protection for, 20
collaboration, 81–82
tools, 113–121, 219
collaborative mode, 112–113
communities, online, 144–159,
169–170
community mode, 112–113
competition
challenges, 77, 169–171
early releases and, 199
effect of innovation on, 87,
211–214
enterprise search market,
185–187
noncompete clauses, 18
computers
early years, 121
microcomputers, 127–128
personal, 20, 65, 85, 113, 121
redundancy, 124–125
Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW), 113
confidence issues, 175–180
conformity, 193–207
Conlisk, J., 150
content, Google approach to,
36–38
contractors/temps, 57, 120,
202, 219
cookies, 175
coordination tools/technologies,
111–121
copyright issues, 102, 152, 153,
180–182
corporate data search, 185–188
cost-cutting measures, 219–221
cost-per-action (CPA), 172, 174
cost-per-click (CPC) model,
30–31, 174
cost per keyword, 217–218
Index 241
cost per thousand (CPM)
strategy, 30
CPA (cost-per-action), 172, 174
CPC (cost-per-click) model,
30–31, 174
CPM (cost per thousand)
strategy, 30
CRM (Customer Relationship
Management)
software, 136
CSCW (Computer Supported
Cooperative Work), 113
CTR (click-through rate), 36,
169, 171
cultural issues, 182–185
Customer Relationship
Management (CRM)
software, 136
customers. See also users
communicating with, 226
complaints, 37–38, 140, 154
early adopters, 85, 148
Google focus on, 226
mainstream users, 85
satisfaction, 140–141, 154
“trapping,” 201–202
D
Dailymotion, 180
data analysis, 99–103
data mining, 102
Datasets Research, 220
Desmond, Laura, 170
Devaraj, Sarv, 40, 87
DirectHit search engine, 15
Doerr, John, 204
Drucker, Peter, 87
Dupuit, Jules, 30
Dutch auction, 22
E
early adopters, 85, 148
eBay, 156
eCommerce, 216–217
economic models, 27–42,
169–171, 188, 194
economic recession, 168, 209–222
Edwards, Doug, 156–157
Efficient Frontier, Inc., 31
Egnor, Daniel, 82
elitism, 54, 55
Ellison, Larry, 49
employees
20 percent strategy, 63–68,
198, 202
benefits, 67
communications, 81
contests, 82
coordination tools/technologies,
111–121
directory, 114–115
on dual career ladder, 71
education, 54–55, 81–82
effects of becoming rich,
203–204, 206
effects of cost-cutting moves,
218, 220–221
hiring/recruitment strategies,
53–61, 100, 202
idea generation, 81–82
motivating, 63–66, 101
networking, 81–82
peer review policy, 69–74
personal blogs, 115–117
promotions, 71, 221
retaining, 63–68
stock options, 56, 197,
202–206
team approach, 105–110
Engelbart, Douglas, 85, 120
Enterprise Resource Planning
(ERP), 121
Enterprise Search, 185–187
enterprise search market, 185–188
entrepreneurs, 16–19, 24–25
ERP (Enterprise Resource
Planning), 121
ethical issues, 152–153
242 Index
F
Fast Company interview,
Eric Schmidt, 71
Fayol, Henri, 105
foreign markets, 182–185, 196
Frankston, Bob, 10
fraud, 152, 153
Freeman, R. Edward, 157
free service model, 29, 38,
194–197
G
Gates, Bill, 10, 49, 54, 91, 186
GDP (gross domestic
product), 214
GFS (Google File System),
125, 126
gift economics, 28, 195
Gilson, Ronald J., 17–18
GLAT (Google Labs Aptitude
Test), 58
global markets, 182–185
Gmail, 156, 195–196, 200–201
Gompers, Paul, 17
Google
Base, 217
Blogoscoped, 144
bombing, 173
challenges, 167–191, 209–222
Checkout, 217
Code, 178
core issues influencing, 193–207
Desktop, 82
Docs, 187–188, 219
early funding for, 16–17
early technology, 13–16
economic model, 27–42, 107,
194, 222
Enterprise, 185
Finance, 220
free service model, 29, 38,
194–197
growth of, 165–191, 196–199
impact of recession on,
209–222
initial public offering (IPO),
21–24
Internet operating system,
94–95
Local, 82
logo, 156–157
management. See management
management model, 223–227
Maps, 95, 200
mathematical culture of, 16,
97–103
News, 79
organized chaos, 197–199
Patents, 178
philosophy, 133–134, 224
post-recession considerations,
222
price shopping via, 216–217
product development, 89–95
Product Search, 217
Professor-Verifier, 82
Scholar, 178
search algorithm, 15–16
Search Appliance, 185
Sites, 220
SketchUp, 147
strategies for success, 38–39
Suggest, 66
Swiss Army knife metaphor,
89–95, 191, 201, 202
tools, 39, 195
triumvirate, 48–51, 190, 197
ubiquity, 39
as verb, 145
Video, 86, 154
Web History, 179–180
winning independence, 21–24
Google File System (GFS),
125, 126
Google Labs Aptitude Test
(GLAT), 58
Gort, Michael, 76
Graham, Paul, 81
Graicunas, V.A., 119
gross domestic product
(GDP), 214
Index 243
H
Hall, Robert E., 218
Hambrecht, William, 22
Hamilton, Ian, 105–106
Hammer, Michael, 121, 123
Hayek, Friedrich, 196
healthcare information, 178
Henzinger, Monika, 60
Hewlett, Bill, 10
Hewlett-Packard, 10
Hirschman, Albert, 195
hosting services, 180
HotBot, 15
Hotmail, 201
Hulu, 181–182
human resources, 202–207, 226
Hummer Winblad, 212–213
I
ideas, developing/acquiring, 81–84
Image Labeler game, 147
imitation, 149–150
impressions, advertising, 31, 168,
171, 217
infrastructure, existing, 127–129
initial public offering (IPO),
21–24
innovation, 75–88
buying ideas, 83–84
challenges, 199–200
controlled, 55
effect on competition, 87,
211–214
financial crisis and, 211–214
importance of, 75–76
involving all employees in,
79–82
models, 148–150
operational, 123–129
intellectual property rights, 20,
152, 153, 181, 212
international markets,
182–185, 196
Internet
advertising, 167–168,
215–216, 222
bubble, 18, 212
operating system, 94–95
services
market share of,
199–200, 201
net neutrality, 188–189
intranet, Google, 98, 114–115
IPO (initial public offering),
21–24
J
Jagolinzer, Alan D., 205
Jansen, George, 172
Japanese quality circles, 79
Jobs, Steve, 10, 49, 60
Joy, Bill, 177
“junk results,” 14
K
Kamath, Anil, 31
keywords
bids on, 30
cost per keyword, 217–218
early approaches to, 13
strategies for, 32
value of, 217–218
Kitts, Brendan, 36
Kohli, Rajiv, 40, 87
Kordestani, Omid, 135, 203, 204
L
language issues, 13, 102–103,
182–185
@LastSoftware, 147
Leblanc, Benjamin, 36
Lenssen, Philipp, 144
Lévy’s general distribution, 40
LexisNexus, 13
Linden, Greg, 60
link bombing, 173
244 Index
link farms, 173
links, fraudulent, 173
Litman, Jessica, 177
“long tail,” 39–42
Lycos, 15
M
Macintosh computer, 78, 107
management
effect of recession on, 221–222
importance of technology in,
224
levels of complexity, 189–191
role of, 117–121
triumvirate structure, 48–51,
190, 197
management model, Google’s,
223–227
Manber, Udi, 102
mapping products, 200
MapReduce system, 125, 126
marketing department, 136–139
market share, 199–200, 201
mashups, 146
mathematical culture, 16, 97–103
Mauss, Marcel, 28
Mayer, Marissa, 70, 77, 89, 154
McKnight, William, 64
memex, 11–12
Méridien hotel lawsuit, 170
Merrill, Douglas, 173
Microsoft, 10, 201–202
Enterprise Search, 185–187
product strategies, 90–91
Miller, Arthur R., 177
mobile phones, 39, 94, 177–178
Moma intranet, 98, 114–115
motivation, 63–66, 101, 156–157
Münchhausen, Baron von, 85
N
National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER), 210
nepotistic links, 173
net neutrality, 188–189
Netscape, 186
noncompete clauses, 18
Norvig, Peter, 58
O
office automation tools, 219
Ogle Earth, 144
OmniFind, 185
one-click ordering, 20
online advertising market,
167–168, 215–216, 222
online communities, 144–159,
169–170. See also blogs
ontologists, 14
OpenIPO system, 22–24
open source software, 28
operational innovations, 123–129
Opsahl, Kurt, 175–176
organizational model, 119–120
organizational theory, 121
Orkut community, 66, 79,
146, 201
Overture Services, Inc., 30
P
Packard, Dave, 10
Page, Larry, 48–51
character traits, 9–11
early years, 10, 11–12, 125
friendship with Brin, 10
perspectives, 51
stock option sales, 204
Page Creator, 220
page ranking, 12–16, 174,
184–185
PageRank mechanism, 174,
184–185
“Panopticon,” 152
PARC research facility, 78, 198
Pareto distribution, 40
patents/patenting, 19–20, 178,
211–213
payment methods, 35–36
via Internet, 34
Index 245
peer review policy, 69–74
Pell, Dave, 86
Penrose, Edith, 190
personal computers, 20, 65, 85,
113, 121
persuasive ads, 33
Pew Internet & American Life
Project, 166
philosophy, 133–134
phishing, 152
Picard, Robert G., 214
Pinkerton, Mike, 65
Playboy interview, Page and
Brin, 23
potlatch, 28
Power Law, 40
Price, Will, 212–213
price stickiness, 217
pricing issues, 137, 138
privacy issues, 152, 153, 175–180
product adoption models,
149–151
product development, 89–95
production system, 123–129
productivity improvements,
218–221
product releases
challenges, 199
early, 84–86, 90
Google approach, 84–86,
92–93, 108
Microsoft approach, 90–91
speed of, 77–78, 82
products
bugs, 85, 91, 93
criticism of, 37–38, 140, 154
early adopters, 85, 148
early strategies for, 90
price shopping, 216–217
pricing issues, 137, 138
“sticky,” 38, 200–202
Professor-Verifier program, 82
property rights, 152, 153
PyraLabs, 84
Q
quality circles, 79–80
quality control, 72–73
R
ranking pages, 12–16
R&D (research and development),
76–77, 88, 210–214
recession, 168, 209–222
reciprocal mode, 112
recruitment strategies, 53–61, 100
redundancy, 124–125
Reese, Dr. Jim, 125
relevant units, 103
reputation, importance of, 70–72,
156–159, 226
reputation-based control, 15, 207
research, formalization of, 77–79
research and development (R&D),
76–77, 88, 210–214
restructuring, 218–219
Reyes, George, 172
ripple effect, 87
Rogers Diffusion Model, 148–149
S
Saberi, Amin, 60, 81
sales automation, 135–141
sales department, 136–139, 140
Sales Force Automation (SFA)
software, 136
Salton, Gerard, 12
Schmidt, Eric
on click fraud, 172
on company growth, 196
on dual career ladder, 71
early years, 48
on long tail phenomenon,
41–42
on math/measurement, 97
on net neutrality, 189
perspectives, 50, 51, 172, 189
stock option sales, 204
Schumpeter, Joseph Alois, 210
246 Index
search engine optimization
(SEO), 32
search engines. See also Google;
specific search engines
advertising on, 29–36
early approaches, 13–15
eCommerce and, 216–217
free service model, 29, 38,
194–197
growth of, 166–167
market share of, 199–200, 201
SEO (search engine optimization),
32
sequential mode, 112
serial entrepreneurs, 16, 17
server logs, 175
SFA (Sales Force Automation)
software, 136
shards, 128
Shriram, Ram, 57
Silicon Valley, 2, 18, 19, 24, 80, 81
SketchUp tool, 147
Smallwood, D.E., 150
SMART (System for the Mechanical
Analysis and
Retrieval of Text), 12
Smith, Adam, 80
social communities, 144–159,
169–170
social media marketing, 151
software patents, 20
spam, 171, 173–174
span of control theory, 105–106
specialization, 19–20
Spinoza, 157
spontaneous order, 115
stakeholders, 157–159
Stanford University, 10, 11–12
statistical data, 99–103
stock, 21–24
stock options, 56, 197, 202–206
stock sales, 204–207
Sullivan, Danny, 194, 195
Sullivan, John, 56
Summer of Code program, 59
Swiss Army knife metaphor,
89–95, 191, 201, 202
System for the Mechanical Analysis
and Retrieval of Text
(SMART), 12
T
team approach, 105–110
technology adoption lifecycle,
149–151
Technorati, 144
technostructure, 106–107, 119
telecommunication companies,
188–189
temporary personnel, 57, 120,
202, 219
thesaurus, 13, 14
thesaurus search method, 14
Thompson, James D., 112
Torvalds, Linus, 86
trademark issues, 20, 170–171,
211–213. See also copyright
issues
transferable stock option (TSO)
program, 203
triumvirate structure, 48–51,
190, 197
Trusted Tester Program, 85
TSO (transferable stock option)
program, 203
Tuzhilin, Alexander, 171–172
two-sided markets, 29
two-tiered voting system, 23
U
universities, collaborating with,
81–82
user relationships, automating,
135–141
Index 247
users. See also customers
behavior, 139–140
unpaid volunteers, 28, 85, 147,
195, 224
V
venture capital firms, 17–21
venture capitalists, 17–21, 25,
212–213
Vickrey, William, 22
video products, 86, 200
video search engine, 154
VisiCalc, 10
volunteerism, 28, 85, 147,
195, 224
“vulture capitalists,” 19
W
Web History feature, 179–180
web statistics, 199–200, 201
Weinstein, Lauren, 158
Weizenbaum, Joseph, 34–35, 67
Winograd, Terry, 113–114
World Wide Web, 188–189. See
also Internet
Wozniak, Steve, 10, 65
X
Xerox PARC research facility,
78, 198
Y
Yahoo!, 14, 31, 170, 172, 185
YouTube, 84, 180, 181
The Google Way is set in Adobe Garamond Pro. It was
printed and bound at Malloy Incorporated in Ann Arbor,
Michigan. The paper is 55 lb. Glatfelter Offset B-18, which
is certified by the Sustainable Forestry Initiative.

Bernard Girard is the author of several books
on management and has consulted for some
of the world’s best-known firms. He lectures
globally on Google’s management strategies
and ways they can be applied to businesses
of all kinds.
business/company profiles
5 2 4 9 5
9 781593 271848
ISBN: 978-1-59327-184-8
6 89145 71840 9
“I think Google should be like
a Swiss Army knife:
clean, simple, the tool you
want to take everywhere.”
— Marissa Mayer, Vice President of Search Products and User Experience
www.nostarch.com
